[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: Uber, the way people interact with each other has been disrupted by Facebook and Twitter
[Amit Varma]: and Instagram.
[Amit Varma]: Entertainment has been disrupted by Netflix and Amazon Prime.
[Amit Varma]: And everywhere, consumers and producers have both benefited enormously from this.
[Amit Varma]: But here's the thing, this disruption has happened in most marketplaces, but not yet
[Amit Varma]: in the political marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: So here's a question worth asking.
[Unknown]: Can politics be disrupted as well?
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest for today is Rajesh Jain, who will be talking about his new project, Dhanwapsi.
[Amit Varma]: I've known Rajesh since early 2015, and he's most famously known for being one of the brains
[Amit Varma]: behind Narendra Modi's rise to power.
[Amit Varma]: But I saw a completely different side of Rajesh when I met him.
[Amit Varma]: He had gotten buyer's remorse in 2014 itself, and when I met him in 2015, was an articulate
[Amit Varma]: and vociferous critic of Modi, a man he had once supported for understandable reasons.
[Amit Varma]: But Rajesh had the intellectual honesty to change his mind about Modi, and the commitment
[Amit Varma]: to continue working on projects that were actually designed to get Modi out of power
[Amit Varma]: at considerable personal risk to himself.
[Amit Varma]: He hasn't spoken about this publicly much in the past, but we'll speak about some of
[Amit Varma]: that on this episode, and we won't speak about certain parts of it.
[Amit Varma]: And while this episode is supposed to be about Dhanwapsi, which is an insanely ambitious
[Amit Varma]: and extremely interesting project he's on, I decided to dedicate only the second half
[Amit Varma]: of the episode to that project, and spend the first half discussing why he supported
[Amit Varma]: Modi to begin with, and what made him change his mind.
[Amit Varma]: This is a really long episode, but it's fascinating, so do listen to the full thing, after a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India, and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art, like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vasvo x Vasvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Amit Varma]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com, that's colors with
[Amit Varma]: an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20, that's IVM for IVM podcast, IVM20
[Amit Varma]: for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Rajesh, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hello, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Rajesh, I've known you for like the last three or four years, I've of course known of you
[Amit Varma]: from way before that you are one of India's first tech millionaires, and I've kind of
[Amit Varma]: been seeing what you've been doing in the blogging space for, you know, from a decade
[Amit Varma]: before that, but I actually met you two or three years ago.
[Amit Varma]: And I find the story of your political consciousness, so to say that how you from just being someone
[Amit Varma]: who'd made a lot of money in tech, to how you got interested in politics in a deeply
[Amit Varma]: passionate way, extremely interesting, because most middle class or rich Indians tend to
[Amit Varma]: be apathetic about politics.
[Amit Varma]: How did that happen?
[Amit Varma]: What changed?
[Guest]: So, my journey into the political space began with a question, a friend of mine, Natanu,
[Guest]: they asked me, it was in late 2008, he said, Rajesh, you've been working in the tech space
[Guest]: for a long time.
[Guest]: When your son, Abhishek, who was three years old at that time, when he grows up and tells
[Guest]: you or asks you, Papa, you saw all that was going wrong in the country.
[Guest]: You had the time, you had the money, why didn't you do something about it?
[Guest]: What will you answer him?
[Guest]: And that was the question which really set me thinking.
[Guest]: And as happens many times, when you start thinking about it, sort of doors open up.
[Guest]: And this was late 2008.
[Guest]: And then early 2009, I'd met with Piyush Goyal, because he had come to assess my company Netcore
[Guest]: for BJP's SMS campaign.
[Guest]: And we got talking.
[Guest]: And then I said, look, there are a lot of people like me who would like to help in the
[Guest]: elections.
[Guest]: We've been sort of longtime BJP supporters, and elections are coming up in four or five
[Guest]: months.
[Guest]: And we'd like to do something about it.
[Guest]: And from there started Friends of BJP.
[Guest]: So it was not sort of structured, just one event led to another.
[Guest]: But the question really made me think about what we need to do to help transform India.
[Amit Varma]: So you're describing yourself here as a BJP supporter at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm presuming the support for the BJP came out of this new political consciousness
[Amit Varma]: or this question that you asked yourself that, what can I do to make my country better for
[Amit Varma]: my kids?
[Guest]: Not really.
[Guest]: As a family, we have been BJP supporters.
[Guest]: My father always would tell us go vote BJP.
[Guest]: So that was it.
[Guest]: And also in the 2000s, when I started sort of thinking for myself, on the political space,
[Guest]: I think one thing which came and was that the policies of the Congress, once you start
[Guest]: reading, you start thinking about it, why has India been poor?
[Guest]: And the party which had been in power for a very long time, of course, has been the
[Guest]: Congress.
[Guest]: And again, if you look back at that period, after 2004, onwards, also, there wasn't anything
[Guest]: substantially different being done from what they had done previously.
[Guest]: So the support for Congress really wasn't there.
[Guest]: I had written a blog post, in fact, in early 2009, when I started Friends of BJP said,
[Guest]: I described BJP as the lighter shade of grey, I said, you can't really, it's not a black
[Guest]: and white thing.
[Guest]: But at that time, the memory, of course, of the BJP was the Vajpayee government and the
[Guest]: sort of some of the reforms that they had brought into play.
[Guest]: So a, there was a family history of having supported the BJP, b, there was some sort
[Guest]: of an antithesis towards the Congress based on my own sort of reading and conversations
[Guest]: with different people.
[Guest]: And third, there was the opportunity which came up through the BJP SMS campaign, which
[Guest]: was, of course, a professional activity that we had done.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And you'd also done a similar professional activity for India against corruption.
[Amit Varma]: So that came in later.
[Amit Varma]: That came in 2011.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I was purely professional.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, just to sort of, again, go back, I mean, obviously, we are, I know, on the
[Amit Varma]: same page as regards to the harm that the Congress has done the country.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we've been poor for decades longer than we should have because of bad policies
[Amit Varma]: in the case of Nehru that you can say they were misguided because those were the fashion
[Amit Varma]: of the time.
[Amit Varma]: There were white statesmen who built institutions and did a lot else, which was great and but
[Amit Varma]: just got the economics all wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And in the case of Indira Gandhi, I mean, I think we'd both agree that many of her economic
[Amit Varma]: policies were crimes on humanity, even if you leave emergency aside, she was an absolute
[Amit Varma]: monster for the damage that she caused to the poor of this country, despite her slogans
[Amit Varma]: like Gareebi Hatao and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So I completely get that, that at some point in time, you begin to feel that, damn it,
[Amit Varma]: we need an alternative.
[Amit Varma]: And we can't have any more of this, our people need freedom in every way, economic freedom
[Amit Varma]: and every other freedom.
[Amit Varma]: But I think where our intellectual parts differ is that I never went from there to support
[Amit Varma]: from the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: BJP seemed to me to be equally bad in other ways.
[Amit Varma]: So I agree with you that Vajpayee's prime ministership did give a lot of hope and he
[Amit Varma]: had some good people like Arun Shourie in his cabinet.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, at the time that you decided to kind of support the BJP and go all in and
[Amit Varma]: you describe them as a lighter shade of grey, inevitably, that would mean propping up Modi
[Amit Varma]: supporting Modi.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and Modi had the history of 2002 behind that.
[Guest]: How did you reconcile that?
[Guest]: So in 2009, actually, before the elections, the support was for Yadvani led BJP at that
[Guest]: particular point of time.
[Guest]: So we have started Friends of BJP, where we tried to organize events in multiple, we did
[Guest]: actually organize events in multiple cities for BJP leaders.
[Guest]: The idea was, how do you get middle class more engaged in conversations in the political
[Guest]: space?
[Guest]: I remember writing about what I called at that time, the secession of the successful
[Guest]: that people, like you said, right in the beginning, people become apathetic in the political space
[Guest]: and they don't tend to vote, or even want to have conversations about those things.
[Guest]: So the idea was, how do you get a more structured form of conversation going?
[Guest]: First, BJP lost the elections and then Friends of BJP also sort of petered out, they didn't
[Guest]: want anything to do with it afterwards.
[Guest]: In political parties, there's no sort of introspection on why you lost.
[Guest]: You can't really point fingers at a single person and you can't, so it's collective responsibility,
[Guest]: which means no one's really responsible.
[Amit Varma]: So you just rationalize what happened and you move on.
[Guest]: So we sort of moved on from there.
[Guest]: And it was in early 2010, when I had met Modi for the first time.
[Guest]: And I met him multiple times after that.
[Guest]: And my belief was, at least from what I had read, and I had not, of course, gone into
[Guest]: the depth of things, but at least when you read up at that time, he did come across as
[Guest]: the tallest leader.
[Guest]: And you compare it with what was happening in the country.
[Guest]: So there's a context also, what's happening in the country, 2010, 2011, some of the scams
[Guest]: had started coming out also, the leadership really of the country was not very strong.
[Guest]: And Gujarat's track record, at least the visible track record at that time was quite good.
[Guest]: I mean, one thing which we would see, which you could see the difference is the roads
[Guest]: really.
[Guest]: You travel from, say, Bombay to Rajasthan, which we used to do often by road.
[Guest]: And you know, when you're leaving Gujarat and you're coming into Rajasthan, the roads
[Guest]: were significantly different.
[Guest]: So the idea was that in the BJP, if you're supporting the BJP and you are a choice between
[Guest]: two parties, really, so if you want to do something in the political space at that time,
[Guest]: it was this or the other, there was no alternative to any of these two.
[Guest]: And my belief at that time was that Modi was the best person to support if the BJP had
[Amit Varma]: to come to power in the next election.
[Amit Varma]: But the question of 2002 still comes up, like, what do you feel about that?
[Guest]: See, at that time, I had not thought much about it.
[Guest]: I think the thing was that in Indian courts, really, have the jurisdiction on decision.
[Guest]: There were many investigations which were happening.
[Guest]: And I sort of left that decision to the courts.
[Guest]: I did not think that it is for me to make a judgment.
[Guest]: I did not have any specific information one way or the other.
[Guest]: And at that time, the economic, so the courts were, of course, making the call and they
[Guest]: did make decisions through the investigative agencies, which cleared Modi, of course.
[Guest]: And on the economic side, the idea was that, at least when you heard Modi in 2013 and 2014
[Guest]: run up, he said all the right things.
[Amit Varma]: He did say all the right things, I agree with you.
[Guest]: And you see the track record, at least of the visible track record, like I said of Gujarat
[Guest]: in terms of infrastructure development, in terms of power, etc.
[Guest]: And more importantly, I think, in the conversations that I had with him, Modi came across as a
[Guest]: very good listener, very open to new ideas, very open to meeting with different people.
[Guest]: In fact, I traveled with him to China in 2011.
[Guest]: And I wrote a fairly detailed blog post about it.
[Guest]: And the one memory which stood out for me was on the flight back.
[Guest]: And there were about 20 people on the flight, mainly business people from Gujarat.
[Guest]: He called everyone to the front of the aircraft and asked everyone, tell me what went right
[Guest]: for you in the trip?
[Guest]: What could we have done better as a team?
[Guest]: And any other candid suggestions and for the next four hours, he was listening to as every
[Guest]: person spoke.
[Guest]: Now, I interacted with politicians in 2009, some of the BJP politicians, and I found this
[Guest]: ability to listen, as just not there in most of the other politicians.
[Guest]: So you combine multiple things together.
[Guest]: And even in my one to one conversations with him, here's a person who is very open, very
[Guest]: listening, which typically doesn't happen, like I said, with the political class.
[Guest]: And that's what I my feeling was that we should support him for, for being the next Prime
[Amit Varma]: Minister.
[Amit Varma]: But beyond the openness, did you find that he has sort of strong beliefs of his own on
[Amit Varma]: anything?
[Amit Varma]: Or is he open in terms of tell me what works, I'll do it?
[Amit Varma]: Or, you know, is he also constantly reflecting and changing his ideas?
[Amit Varma]: Does he have a belief system in place?
[Guest]: See, the context in which we were interacting at that time was primarily the elections part
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So it was the first Gujarat elections of 2012, December, which took place, and then the national
[Guest]: elections.
[Guest]: And the one thing which I had told him is that I will work from the outside for you.
[Guest]: I do not want any funds from the BJP, I think you are the best person to lead the country.
[Guest]: I will invest my own money.
[Guest]: And I will set up my own team, because I want to see you as Prime Minister.
[Amit Varma]: So those conversations were more on questions of instrumentality, like, how do I win?
[Amit Varma]: What strategy should we have?
[Amit Varma]: How do I portray myself?
[Amit Varma]: And but you didn't really get a deeper sense of what are his actual core beliefs?
[Guest]: No, I did not spend time discussing that.
[Guest]: It's primarily around, I would give tech ideas for the campaign, because that is what I knew
[Unknown]: well.
[Guest]: And I was not very conversant really with the political and the economic part of it.
[Guest]: And political at best, you can read and try and summarize and give it.
[Guest]: But what fascinated me was the fact that, for the first time, you could actually start
[Guest]: using technology to shape a campaign.
[Guest]: Obama had done that in the 2012 campaign in the US.
[Guest]: And using technology, he had helped create a community organizing sort of network of
[Guest]: people, volunteers across the country.
[Guest]: There was a book which had come out in late 2012, Victory Lab, which actually said how
[Guest]: political science was used through the years in the US.
[Guest]: And I was very interested in taking some of those ideas and applying it in the Indian
[Guest]: context.
[Guest]: So mobile penetration was going up, internet was becoming much, much better, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the sort of learnings you then took from these new campaigns, like Obama's
[Amit Varma]: campaign and, you know, apply to Modi's campaign for 2014?
[Guest]: So one of the first things which I had done, which in June of 2011, actually, again, using
[Guest]: data, I had looked at the BJP's electoral performance through the years.
[Guest]: And I realized that they had won 299 seats at least once.
[Guest]: And this was a number which was really no one knew about it.
[Guest]: When I would ask people, no one could give an answer.
[Guest]: And from there, I wrote a blog post, which said Project 275 for 2014.
[Guest]: I was the first person to actually articulate that the BJP could get a majority of its own
[Guest]: in the next election.
[Amit Varma]: It was three years.
[Amit Varma]: And before that, the paradigm was that, hey, we'll get 160, 170, have a coalition, have
[Guest]: an Indian government.
[Guest]: In fact, exactly right.
[Guest]: I mean, people would laugh when I would tell them that, look, instead of thinking 180,
[Guest]: you need to think 100 seats more.
[Guest]: And the strategy for trying to win 180 versus the strategy for 280 is very different.
[Guest]: 180, really, it's a summation of state elections.
[Guest]: But if you want to get a majority on your own, you need to make it a wave election.
[Guest]: So there has to be one dominant theme pretty much across the country.
[Guest]: And I said, that is really what I want to work on, but I didn't want to take any orders
[Guest]: from anyone else.
[Guest]: I was very clear.
[Guest]: As an entrepreneur, I'm doing it from the outside.
[Guest]: So that then led me to the formation of Neeti.
[Guest]: And we worked in four areas.
[Guest]: So those were the sort of learnings I picked up from my experience in 2009.
[Guest]: And then only keeping on looking at the political space, where are the gaps?
[Guest]: So I said, we need four things.
[Guest]: We need a media platform, because there was nothing which was really pro-BJP or able to
[Guest]: articulate the BJP viewpoint or even be pro-Modi.
[Guest]: So that was Neeti Central, which we set up.
[Guest]: The second one was India Votes, which had all the electoral data.
[Guest]: Again, it was very hard to get elections data.
[Guest]: The Election Commission had it, but it was in Excel files and PDFs.
[Guest]: So we took all of that and made it into a very nice, browsable, public, open site.
[Guest]: Then there was the analytics.
[Guest]: So where do you focus on?
[Guest]: So there are 10 lakh booths in the country, 543 constancies.
[Guest]: Which are the constancies where you have a greater chance of winning?
[Guest]: In the constancies, which booths should you focus on?
[Guest]: There's a lot of historical data available through Form 20 data, which is the booth level
[Guest]: data, which is made public again on the Election Commission site, but no one would look at
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And the fourth one was the volunteering platform.
[Guest]: So what we called India272.com at that time, that people could, wherever they are in the
[Guest]: country, help in spreading information about Modi or about the BJP and what it wants to
[Guest]: do to people in their neighborhood.
[Guest]: So without becoming part of the formal party structure, you could just work on that.
[Guest]: So I took learnings from what I had seen in 2009, what I thought were missing, plus some
[Guest]: from my readings, and then like an entrepreneur, you know, you identify which are the gaps,
[Guest]: and then you see how you can plug those or fill those.
[Amit Varma]: One of the podcasts I had done over here was with Prashant Jha, who wrote the book, How
[Amit Varma]: the BJP Wins, which is a description of say, Amit Shah's, and I recommend listeners listen
[Amit Varma]: to that episode, because it's got a lot of insight.
[Amit Varma]: And his book is really about Amit Shah's work on the ground where he would travel incessantly
[Amit Varma]: and go across, you know, all the different cities and booths and revamp the organization
[Amit Varma]: completely.
[Amit Varma]: So what was the synergy between, for example, the data that you were coming out with the
[Amit Varma]: analytics and the party organization and how they were using that?
[Guest]: In parts.
[Guest]: So we had made a lot of this information available to the BJP and RSS ground campaigners, right.
[Guest]: And it was available through a website where they could pick up this information, pick
[Guest]: up the electoral rolls, we are on a campaign where if you supported Modi, you could SMS
[Guest]: your voter ID.
[Guest]: And then we digitize the electoral rolls, so we could then map voter IDs to the person
[Guest]: and the constituency.
[Guest]: So the idea is, see, in the election, it's actually a very simple idea.
[Guest]: It's basically being able to identify who supports you, and who does not, and who are
[Guest]: the ones in the middle.
[Guest]: So it's a support score that you need, combined with a turnout score.
[Guest]: So if you are likely to support and you're likely to turn out, you don't need, nothing
[Guest]: needs to be done to that person, they're going to go out and vote on their own.
[Guest]: If they don't support, not likely to turn out, again, you can't do much about them.
[Guest]: But if you're likely to support, low propensity to turn out, then you need some persuasion,
[Guest]: you need some push to make sure you vote on election day.
[Guest]: And if you are high turnout, but low on support, then you need persuasion.
[Guest]: So you can actually slot people in this matrix.
[Guest]: And then, but again, there's not enough data still available, or at least at that time,
[Guest]: it wasn't.
[Guest]: But those were the ideas.
[Guest]: So those were the experiments, or those are the things which I tried to do.
[Guest]: And a lot of it depended on the ground operation, that people had different candidates, including
[Guest]: in the two constituencies that Modi fought, they would have, where there was a better
[Guest]: ground organization, they would then be able to go out and do the door to door outreach.
[Guest]: See, in India, one of the big problems is that candidates are typically not declared
[Guest]: until three weeks before the elections, there are no primaries.
[Guest]: So it's very hard to run a proper campaign, actually.
[Guest]: So you need, I think there are a lot of systemic changes which need to happen for data and
[Guest]: tech to have a much greater play in elections.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, kind of moving away from the mechanics of this, which is a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: subject in itself, and maybe we'll do another episode on it sometime.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, at this point, essentially, what the BJP was doing is it was campaigning
[Amit Varma]: on different fronts, it was presenting different faces of itself.
[Amit Varma]: And one of those, of course, is Vikas.
[Amit Varma]: And that's pretty much, I guess, why you became involved in the first place, because you correctly
[Amit Varma]: felt that what India really needs is economic freedom.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not just an economic question, it's a humanitarian question, because millions
[Amit Varma]: have been in poverty for decades longer than should have been the case.
[Amit Varma]: And we badly need reforms and economic freedom.
[Amit Varma]: And here is a guy who is saying the right things, as we subsequently know, none of that
[Amit Varma]: happened.
[Amit Varma]: But along with his Vikas talk, there is also polarizing talk, there is also a lot of bigotry,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of which was, in fact, reflected in the site that you own, Neeti Central, which
[Amit Varma]: to me had two problems, and one issue, of course, was editorial content, because it
[Amit Varma]: would publish just about anything, and there wasn't enough discernment.
[Amit Varma]: But the other issue was that a huge chunk of Neeti Central content, for example, was
[Amit Varma]: bigoted, anti-Muslim Hindutva content, I say Hindutva as opposed to Hinduism, the two being
[Amit Varma]: very different, and not enough of sort of the Vikas economic content.
[Amit Varma]: Did this disturb you at some point?
[Guest]: Was it something you thought about?
[Guest]: See, the site, essentially, and I don't agree with you on your assessment of the site.
[Guest]: The site, our goal really was that there are BJP supporters across the country, whether
[Guest]: it's spokespeople or supporters, and they needed material to be able to defend themselves
[Guest]: against what is being spoken, because you also need to understand that the media pretty
[Guest]: much in its entirety at that time, the 2010 to 2014 timeframe, was very much anti-BJP
[Guest]: and anti-Mudi.
[Guest]: So, there needed to be an alternate platform, which really puts across an alternative viewpoint,
[Guest]: which different people could use it to counter really what was happening.
[Guest]: So, we did try and have a wide mix of A, trying to articulate what is wrong with the current
[Guest]: narrative and putting out an alternate narrative.
[Guest]: I mean, some people may have different views on the content, but our idea was very clear
[Guest]: that we needed to get this out, because there was no space in the traditional print and
[Guest]: TV media sites, and there were very few internet sites at that time, media, political media
[Guest]: sites.
[Guest]: Of course, there's a proliferation of that now, at that time, to bring this viewpoint
[Guest]: across.
[Amit Varma]: So, I don't agree with you on your characterization.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you would know the site much better than me, and you did shut it down after you
[Guest]: mentioned it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I was very clear that the purpose was still the election.
[Guest]: And then after that, you know, we, of course, disbanded most of the team, pretty much the
[Guest]: entire teams over the year, course of the year after the election results.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, I want to ask one more question, which I think we've discussed before.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that it's something I kind of bring up and feel strongly about, which is
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, my support for economic freedom is really part of my support for freedom in
[Amit Varma]: a larger sense, that of all individual freedoms that arises out of that.
[Amit Varma]: So, I will also, for example, I'm a free speech absolutist, I'll also support all kinds of
[Amit Varma]: personal freedoms.
[Amit Varma]: I was delighted when 377 was abolished recently.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, these are off a piece, these can't be separate things that if you really care
[Amit Varma]: about freedom, economic freedom, and personal freedoms kind of go together.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also why I was against the BJP even then, because the thing is that while
[Amit Varma]: they were talking about economic freedom, they really did not give a damn about the
[Amit Varma]: other freedoms, it seemed to me at the time today, of course, we both of us know in hindsight
[Amit Varma]: that they don't care about any kind of freedom and on economics are actually as left wing
[Amit Varma]: as their predecessors.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they're all basically the same.
[Amit Varma]: But personally, how much of, for example, your concern for economic freedom comes from,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, do you support freedoms in all of these other contexts, or is your support of
[Amit Varma]: economic freedom something that comes out of saying that India is a poor country, we
[Amit Varma]: should be rich and economic freedom will get us there and for these consequentialist reasons,
[Guest]: therefore, I support it.
[Guest]: So, there are two ways to look at that question.
[Guest]: One is what I feel.
[Guest]: And second is, what is it that we can persuade people about?
[Guest]: So, I am still learning on the freedom part, I've read a lot, when I educated myself in
[Guest]: economics post 2014.
[Guest]: So, my background has been in technology.
[Guest]: So, I heard the terms like classical liberalism or libertarian or public choice after 2014,
[Guest]: it was not before that.
[Guest]: Even the term economic freedom really, what I understood the full meaning of it later
[Guest]: on and not before that.
[Guest]: I think, of course, like you said, a lot of these freedoms, they all go hand in hand.
[Guest]: You can't have one without the other, though you can argue that countries like Singapore,
[Guest]: countries like China have clamped down on political freedom allowed, at least some parts
[Guest]: in China have allowed much greater economic freedom.
[Guest]: I think in India, what we really need, because when you take this message out to people,
[Guest]: here's the problem.
[Guest]: When you go out and tell people that look, you need freedom, the answer you get back
[Guest]: is, oh, but we are free.
[Guest]: We got free on August 15, 1947.
[Guest]: So, the word freedom itself, there is a big challenge in persuading people about the need
[Guest]: for freedom.
[Guest]: And most people don't have the same sort of intellectual capability to read and analyze
[Guest]: why freedom is so important and the cornerstone for prosperity.
[Guest]: So, when I thought about the problem, I said, rather than talk about freedom, which then
[Guest]: gets you into independence and on a different track, let's start with prosperity.
[Guest]: It's something which is tangible.
[Guest]: India is a poor country.
[Guest]: It has been deliberately kept poor over the past 70 years.
[Guest]: And that is something which people can feel and understand that you should have been 10
[Guest]: times wealthier by now, but you are not.
[Guest]: That is something which is easier to sell, to persuade people about, than to say that
[Guest]: look, you need more freedom of speech or more individual freedom.
[Guest]: That becomes a little harder problem.
[Guest]: So, I said, let's start with the economic outcome that we want to talk about.
[Guest]: And from there, then we can actually talk about all the other elements.
[Guest]: They will all become natural elements which will flow into making the end happen.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's, you know, and this is really a part of your thinking, your support for Modi
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, that you actually left behind and you left it behind in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: Can you describe to me how very early on in Modi's prime ministership, you kind of knew
[Amit Varma]: that you had made a mistake and that he was going in the wrong direction?
[Guest]: Can you tell me a little bit about that?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I think it started, the process, of course, was gradual.
[Guest]: There were step functions, I think, in that process.
[Guest]: But I think the first step was really the initial team that was put together as part
[Guest]: of for the cabinet.
[Guest]: I think till what was very interesting was that the campaign was essentially managed
[Guest]: by a lot of people from the outside.
[Guest]: But when it came to the team, the cabinet which was formed, and there was a lot of speculation
[Guest]: between 16th May 2014 and 26th May when the cabinet was announced, there would be outsiders,
[Guest]: there would be laterals.
[Guest]: And I think it was a moment in time when there were a lot of people from India and abroad
[Guest]: who I think if they had been tapped into and told that, look, the next three years, we'd
[Guest]: like you to work for making Indians rich or making India prosperous, very few would have
[Guest]: had hesitation in actually agreeing to something like this.
[Guest]: So, the first problem which I saw was the talent that had been assembled.
[Guest]: The second was the language.
[Guest]: I think the language changed quite dramatically from pre-election, which was about aspirations,
[Guest]: it was more of the neo-middle class term that Modi sort of used to talk about.
[Guest]: And it became very quickly about the poor.
[Guest]: And I think as we know, that the more you talk about the poor, and the more you try
[Guest]: to do things specifically for the poor, you are basically ensuring that they will stay
[Guest]: poor for the rest of their life.
[Guest]: So, that was the second thing.
[Guest]: Third was that I think we lost or Modi lost really the first 100 to 200 days, which was
[Guest]: the time for dramatic change.
[Guest]: And the agenda for what needed to get done, actually, if you want to make Indians rich
[Guest]: is pretty clear.
[Guest]: I mean, you got to undo the anti-prosperity machine which has been running for the past
[Guest]: 70 years, whether it's in education, healthcare, labor, land, admin reforms, pretty much every
[Guest]: sector of the economy, and none of that happened.
[Guest]: So, I'm seeing the first five, six months, where it's basically a continuation.
[Guest]: And the budget, I think the first budget which got presented in July, was effectively a rehash
[Guest]: of the previous or the pointers in the budget or the economic survey were just rehash of
[Guest]: the previous one.
[Guest]: So, then where is the change?
[Guest]: The second sort of event, which I think was concerning to me, was the response to the
[Guest]: phrase Sootboot ki Sarkar.
[Guest]: I mean, that happened probably in early 2015.
[Guest]: And I think Modi turned decisively more socialist, more towards the left after that.
[Guest]: So, the poor focus became a lot more heightened.
[Guest]: What he really should have done, and I think the Modi who was the campaigner would probably
[Guest]: have done this thing, but maybe the Modi, the Prime Minister did not look at it the
[Guest]: same way.
[Guest]: He should have come out and said that, look, of course, we want a Sootboot ki Sarkar.
[Guest]: We want every Indian to be in a Sootboot.
[Guest]: We want every Indian to be rich, so they have the choice of what they decide what to wear.
[Guest]: But that did not happen.
[Guest]: So, that was, I think, a huge missed opportunity, because after that, the economic slide sort
[Guest]: of continues.
[Guest]: And I think the next big sort of the breaking point really, in my mind, came with demonetization.
[Guest]: Demonetization I think was, I mean, you know, no right thinking leader would inflict this
[Guest]: on any country, on people.
[Guest]: It was the largest, probably abuse of individual rights this country has ever seen and perhaps
[Guest]: will ever see.
[Guest]: And I remember having a phone call, phone chat on the day, the night the demonetization
[Guest]: was announced and telling people, telling a few of my friends that this is India's road
[Guest]: to serfdom, road to serfdom, as you all know, the Hayek book, I said, this is just not done.
[Guest]: And even the reasons which were outlined, it is very clear, I mean, corruption does
[Guest]: not happen when two individuals are transacting.
[Guest]: Corruption happens when people have to interact with those in government or in the political
[Amit Varma]: space.
[Amit Varma]: Whoever has power over you has power over those corrupts.
[Guest]: So all of the reasons which were set out, seemed to me completely wrong.
[Guest]: And it just didn't seem right.
[Guest]: So I said that is, but of course, and in parallel, what was happening also was my own economic
[Guest]: education was happening.
[Guest]: So from 2014, the first time I remember attending a CCS seminar in Delhi in late 2014 and hearing
[Guest]: about public choice and was an aha moment where I said, okay, so this really explains
[Guest]: how politicians behave when they are in power, they are just like us as self-interested.
[Guest]: And the goal is not out there to do good for the people, it's to do good for themselves.
[Guest]: And doing good for themselves means doing those things, which is going to keep them
[Guest]: in power.
[Guest]: So this backdrop of my own education, plus what I saw on the trajectory, which I saw
[Guest]: with the Modi government, helped create my disillusionment and then made me really decide
[Amit Varma]: of what to do next.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, like public choice theory, I often say is something that every Indian should
[Amit Varma]: really learn about because it totally explains the system so well and however, in fact, Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajgopal and a mutual friend and I are planning to do a series of episodes where we talk about
[Amit Varma]: public choice theory.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm really looking forward to that.
[Amit Varma]: Going back to demonetization, obviously, I agree with you entirely, at that time, I called
[Amit Varma]: it the largest assault on property rights in human history.
[Amit Varma]: And it was very Maoist more than anything else, I saw the parallels between Mao's great
[Amit Varma]: leap forward and demonetization very striking in this in the kind of social engineering
[Amit Varma]: that Modi was attempting, and I have a number of episodes on that, which will be linked
[Amit Varma]: from this.
[Amit Varma]: Regarding what you said about Sood Bhut ki Sarkar, I think the criticism of Sood Bhut
[Amit Varma]: ki Sarkar and criticism that I agree with was like the Sood Bhut to me was reflective
[Amit Varma]: not of prosperity, but of cronyism.
[Guest]: And that was the main criticism.
[Guest]: But what Modi should have done is turned it around, right, okay.
[Guest]: So in an attempt to be anti cronyism, and as we are seeing now, it's probably been getting
[Guest]: proven the other way around.
[Guest]: What should have been done is said that we want every person, so it was more of dealing
[Guest]: with the rich, but he should have turned it around and made it into a symbol of prosperity
[Amit Varma]: for every Indian.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a rhetorical solution.
[Amit Varma]: That's optics.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, Modi is brilliant at optics and it's surprising that he missed this out.
[Amit Varma]: But my issue with him always has been that he nails the optics, but he completely gets
[Amit Varma]: policies wrong.
[Amit Varma]: He doesn't actually do anything.
[Guest]: So that's a separate point, basically, where I think the fundamental problem is that of
[Guest]: lack of A, an understanding.
[Guest]: I don't think any Indian politician really understands why India is poor.
[Guest]: And therefore, what we need to do for prosperity.
[Guest]: And that's the most fundamental issue, which really is there.
[Guest]: And therefore, when they all come to power, it's more a continuation of what's happening.
[Guest]: Because without having self beliefs on what creates prosperity, it's going to be continuity
[Guest]: on what's happening.
[Guest]: I think that remains the first challenge.
[Guest]: The second is, of course, India's bureaucracy, really saddled with the same old ideas.
[Guest]: The secretaries in Delhi are today probably 58 to 60.
[Guest]: And with ideas which are 20, 30 years old, I mean, India never really has, where do you
[Guest]: in India do we hear about Adam Smith, about Friedman, about Buchanan, about Hayek?
[Guest]: These ideas aren't even taught in our schools and colleges in economics.
[Guest]: So without that understanding, I think it's impossible for things to change.
[Guest]: And more importantly, I think people have really no understanding without like you said
[Guest]: about public choice.
[Guest]: And I think that kind of education needs to be done.
[Guest]: And it's actually a very simple idea.
[Guest]: Once you explain it to people that look, the politician is not some saint who's different
[Guest]: from you and me.
[Guest]: The politician is basically just like you and me.
[Guest]: And you look at your self interest, the politician does the same.
[Guest]: The politician's self interest just happens to be staying in power, getting reelected.
[Guest]: And once you use that lens, it actually becomes clear.
[Guest]: But no one's taking this message out to people.
[Guest]: Once we start doing this, I think we'll start creating a demand for change in the country.
[Guest]: And so it's either, so where does change come from?
[Guest]: It either comes from a leader who understands, which we did not have in this case, or from
[Guest]: people who demand it, which also has not been there.
[Amit Varma]: That's the problem.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what I should point out to my listeners is that while you were talking about all the
[Amit Varma]: different reasons to be disillusioned with the Congress coming down all the way to demonetization,
[Amit Varma]: you were disillusioned with Modi and you saw it same for what it was from well before that.
[Amit Varma]: I remember meeting you in early 2015.
[Amit Varma]: And you were already very clear that the country was going down a very harmful road and you
[Amit Varma]: needed to do something about it.
[Guest]: Yes, because if you look back, it's the first 100 to 200 days really when transformative
[Guest]: change can actually happen.
[Guest]: And I had studied the Reagan period, Reagan basically, there was a complete document prepared
[Guest]: by Heritage Foundation on the changes that were required in the government at that time.
[Guest]: And most of those changes were done, started at least the narrative and the change process
[Guest]: was started early on.
[Guest]: In India also, what happens is because of the continuity of or a continuous flow of
[Guest]: assembly elections, you know, you are set back in one election, then you go back to
[Guest]: sort of quaint old ideas, flawed old ideas of the past.
[Guest]: And here was a person who could basically, I think, persuade the country on any idea.
[Guest]: And to have missed out the first six months, I think is unpardonable, really, because that
[Guest]: is where the country was primed for change.
[Guest]: And in every sector, I mean, we had to loosen up, we had to give really economic freedom
[Guest]: to people and Modi was the person who could have sold it.
[Guest]: And that was the vote.
[Guest]: He had the mandate.
[Guest]: Again, like you said, the mandate was a majority.
[Guest]: So he could get anything done in the Lok Sabha.
[Guest]: Oil at that time was at like $40.
[Guest]: You have a leader who can sell, I mean, this is a moment in time, which was really after
[Guest]: a generation.
[Guest]: I mean, this had not happened since 1984.
[Guest]: And it completely blew the opportunity.
[Guest]: And that really upset me quite a bit, because to make that change, I think you needed two
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: One, you needed to have a deeper understanding of what creates prosperity.
[Guest]: And second is you needed talent.
[Guest]: You needed people different from the political class and the existing bureaucrats, because
[Guest]: they all think pretty much the same way.
[Guest]: And without laterals, without having lost the first three to six months, I think it
[Guest]: was then very clear that it's a very uphill struggle and therefore it's not going to change.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's another thing that, you know, public choice teaches us, right?
[Amit Varma]: If you look at the traditional politicians and the traditional bureaucrats, they have
[Amit Varma]: their self-interest in mind first, their incentives are towards increasing their power, getting
[Amit Varma]: elected again, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: So if you actually want radical reform, then you've got to bring in people from outside.
[Amit Varma]: Which brings me then to the question is that two questions really, and a sort of a small
[Amit Varma]: question and a big question, the small question being that, who would you like to have seen
[Amit Varma]: in the cabinet?
[Amit Varma]: What would have given you hope?
[Amit Varma]: And the big question being, what are the key changes, maybe three or four, that you would
[Amit Varma]: have liked to see in those first six months?
[Guest]: I think what we needed at that point of time is first, Modi should have basically got his
[Guest]: team together, got a bunch of economists and probably people from other countries, even
[Guest]: spoken to others, possibly, at that time, Lee Kuan Yew was of course still alive in
[Amit Varma]: early 2014.
[Amit Varma]: He did get Arvind Panagariya for the Niti Aayog, who completely disgraced himself by
[Amit Varma]: going against his life's work, basically.
[Guest]: That came in much later.
[Guest]: So, ideas, I think, were there, but they needed to be internalized.
[Guest]: On what does India really need to change from the trajectory of the past?
[Guest]: Okay, so that was, I think, the first thing.
[Guest]: And you needed experts, really, you needed people, at least expert inputs.
[Guest]: You definitely did not need politicians manning the entire cabinet.
[Guest]: And even between 16 and 26, there was talk of, oh, we'll have a much more reduced cabinet,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: There should have been no HRD minister, there should have been no telecom minister, there
[Guest]: should have been no civil aviation minister.
[Guest]: You basically didn't need 80% of the positions, that would have sent a very strong message.
[Amit Varma]: That the command and control mindset of the past is gone.
[Guest]: Mindset is gone.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: There were, another simple thing which would have been done is many of the, what they call
[Guest]: the concurrent list, should have been just handed over to the state, decentralization.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, when you talk of, so, it's very hard to pinpoint specific people.
[Guest]: But essentially, what I'm saying is, needed a smaller number of people who basically understood
[Guest]: or understand what creates prosperity, I think that was the single most important agenda
[Guest]: for this country.
[Guest]: I mean, we'll talk about it more when we, in the second half, but the big changes, I
[Guest]: think, which needed to happen, I think number one is education.
[Guest]: I mean, we have, I think, yet again, blown another five-year term, where we keep messing
[Guest]: up on education.
[Guest]: And this has happened now for 70 plus years, it started with Nehru, who did not get one
[Guest]: generation of Indians educated.
[Guest]: If one generation of Indians had been educated well, they will ensure that the next generation
[Guest]: is educated better than they are.
[Guest]: So, he invested in higher education at the cost of primary education.
[Guest]: So, where was education?
[Guest]: When you look at the corporate ideas in economic freedom, in terms of administrative reforms,
[Guest]: the way the bureaucracy actually works, you look at getting rid of government presence
[Guest]: in all of various sectors of the economy, I think we needed to just get the government
[Guest]: out from all of those things.
[Guest]: I mean, Vajpayee had done a little bit of that, but the government had no business being
[Guest]: in any of these sectors.
[Guest]: Essentially, again, all of it would have, these things would have happened, had there
[Guest]: been an understanding of what creates prosperity, and there is only one path which creates prosperity.
[Guest]: If you study the countries which have become rich, it's the path of limited government,
[Guest]: it's free markets, it's free trade, it's individual freedom, it's a rule of law and property rights.
[Guest]: This is the core mix.
[Guest]: So, every policy should have been taken, keeping this framework in mind, policies which are
[Guest]: non-discriminatory, policies which basically decentralize power closest to where the people
[Guest]: are.
[Guest]: But none of that actually happened because the core understanding was not there.
[Guest]: So, without that core understanding, then you stick to, oh, so, it's essentially like,
[Guest]: it's not like Warren Buffett type investing strategy, it is more like day trading.
[Amit Varma]: So, it's almost like all of Modi's openness, which you spoke about earlier, was openness
[Amit Varma]: in terms of how do I win this thing, and not openness in terms of evaluating his ideas
[Amit Varma]: on what is right, what is wrong, what should I actually do, how should I actually govern,
[Amit Varma]: but more in terms of how do I win, how do I win, and that obsession, and that, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: you know, while campaigning, he could be all things to all people, he could say words which
[Amit Varma]: from music to warriors, like minimum government, maximum governance, but actually, which he
[Amit Varma]: didn't give a damn about and didn't deliver on at all.
[Guest]: In hindsight, this is an absolutely correct understanding.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I want to take you back to a point you made earlier, where again, I entirely
[Amit Varma]: agree with you that one of the problems here is that these ideas are sort of not part of
[Amit Varma]: our culture, that people don't value economic freedom, people don't value freedom per se.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, my, the way I come to economic freedom is just saying that look, two consenting adults
[Amit Varma]: should be able to do whatever they want with each other, whether it is in a bedroom or
[Amit Varma]: in the marketplace, no one else has a moral right to get in the way this is a moral issue
[Amit Varma]: as much as a consequentialist one, but a lot of Indians wouldn't even agree with that basic
[Amit Varma]: premise that two consenting adults should do whatever they want with each other.
[Amit Varma]: There are all kinds of social and cultural norms, which are which we would consider problematic.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I would imagine that one of the things that you then say is that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: you know, if you look at the political marketplace, there's supply, there's demand, I need to
[Amit Varma]: change the demand side, I need to change the culture, and only then will, you know, politicians
[Amit Varma]: with those kinds of ideas actually come to power and do something about it, which therefore
[Amit Varma]: becomes then a sort of a long term project.
[Amit Varma]: And instead, what you sort of did after you realized that Modi wasn't the way to go over
[Amit Varma]: a series of projects, which was still sort of predicated on the supply side itself.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to spend a few minutes talking about each of them before we come to Dhanwabse.
[Amit Varma]: For example, your constitution project, where you decided that you want to change the constitution.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: Why the constitution?
[Amit Varma]: Why did that come to mind?
[Guest]: So, when I started thinking, and talking to various people on why is India really poor?
[Guest]: So, of course, the simple answer is Indians lack freedom.
[Guest]: But why do Indians lack freedom?
[Guest]: And the answer goes back to the rules that are there.
[Guest]: There's nothing wrong with Indians, you take the same person from here, you put that person
[Guest]: in America or Singapore, and in five years, they'll be doing incredibly well.
[Guest]: So, there's nothing genetically or there's no DNA problem with Indians.
[Guest]: So, there's obviously a problem with the external circumstances or in the external environment
[Guest]: in which they're operating in.
[Guest]: And the core set of rules are actually defined in the Indian constitution.
[Guest]: And when we started studying the constitution, I think what was the shocking realization
[Guest]: was that 242 out of 395 articles in the original constitution were pretty much lifted verbatim
[Guest]: from the 1935 Government of India Act.
[Guest]: Let's understand that the 1935 Government of India Act was written by a colonial power,
[Guest]: the British, to subjugate and rule over Indians.
[Guest]: And we kept two thirds of that, or we used that to become two thirds of our constitution.
[Guest]: And once you go through the constitution of India, it's a the longest one.
[Guest]: And length does not mean greatness or goodness at all.
[Guest]: It's written by lawyers, readable only by lawyers.
[Guest]: If then else's butts are all over the place, it's a pretty much unreadable document, can
[Guest]: be interpreted in any different way.
[Guest]: Most important, it basically puts the people as subservient to the government.
[Guest]: That is, I think, the most fundamental problem.
[Guest]: And then you compare it with the American constitution, which is effectively carried
[Guest]: in a pocket, 20 amendments, only 25 odd amendments in 200 plus years, but written in a language
[Guest]: a 10-year-old can read and understand.
[Guest]: Simple example, you take article, the first amendment, basically, says Congress shall
[Guest]: make no law, among other things, abridging freedom of speech.
[Guest]: What it really means is that every person has the freedom of speech naturally.
[Guest]: It's there with them, and Congress cannot make any law suppressing it or abridging it
[Guest]: in any way.
[Guest]: In India, if you read the 1700 word first amendment on the same theme, effectively,
[Guest]: it says you can say what you want, as long as you don't disagree with what the government
[Amit Varma]: wants.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And that's the root of that.
[Guest]: You know, that sets the context.
[Amit Varma]: All the caveats mentioned in article 19, like public order, decency, and so on, which makes
[Guest]: freedom of speech irrelevant, basically, we pay lip service to it.
[Guest]: But when we started thinking, it's the rules, so we can keep changing rulers.
[Guest]: But if you don't change the rules, your outcomes are not going to change.
[Guest]: And the core set of rules were defined in the Indian constitution.
[Guest]: So that is when I started thinking that India needs a new constitution, because if you change
[Guest]: the rules, then you will start to at least get different outcomes.
[Guest]: But of course, the process of changing the constitution is a long drawn out one.
[Guest]: Second is when I started talking to people, people would get spooked with this idea.
[Guest]: Because we have been all taught to revere our constitution, of course, not a single
[Guest]: person I met, and I must have spoken to hundreds of people at that time, has actually even
[Guest]: read the constitution.
[Guest]: I would carry the Indian constitution, the thick Indian constitution, and a copy of the
[Guest]: American constitution.
[Guest]: Now, it's basically one sort of long page, where you have everything written out there.
[Guest]: But no one does it.
[Guest]: So this is, I mean, other than the preamble, I don't think anyone gets past, preamble also,
[Guest]: of course, has problems, as we all know, socialist and secular and all that stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So that was...
[Guest]: What's wrong with secular?
[Guest]: Yes, you don't have to put it in there.
[Guest]: It's an individual choice that is there.
[Guest]: And the way we have used secular, by putting it in there, is completely the opposite of
[Guest]: what really was the intent of secular.
[Guest]: It has been, it has been twisted through the years.
[Guest]: And of course, socialist, where you just insert...
[Guest]: Now, my thinking at that time was that the constitution really are the coarser of rules,
[Guest]: and that needs to get changed, if India has to be put on a path to prosperity.
[Guest]: But then I realized very quickly, that it's not an idea you can try persuading people
[Guest]: about.
[Guest]: And it's also an impossibility to try and change it, because the way the proper process
[Guest]: is you need Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, majority states and all of that stuff.
[Guest]: And we're not even clear about how that can be done, because of the basic structure doctrine
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So, it became a very complicated part.
[Guest]: But I said, at least, I still tell, I show people who come and meet me in the office,
[Guest]: the American and the Indian constitution.
[Amit Varma]: I said, look at these two and try reading it.
[Amit Varma]: So, there's something here that you're an engineer, right?
[Amit Varma]: So, I know that appeals to you that you just change a few rules somewhere and everything
[Amit Varma]: works differently.
[Amit Varma]: But what I'm trying to reconcile here is, and where I probably disagree, is that one
[Amit Varma]: of the criticisms against the constitution in the first place is that it's a constitution
[Amit Varma]: imposed by liberals on a country which is not really liberal.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, we know the constitution is deeply illiberal, doesn't support free speech, doesn't
[Amit Varma]: support all kinds of personal freedoms, but it's still relatively more liberal than the
[Guest]: country per se.
[Guest]: At least the original 1951 was, till they started with all the amendments, as Shruti
[Amit Varma]: has explained.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti has explained and we linked up a brilliant talk she gave about how Nehru and Indira and
[Amit Varma]: so on, all the way to the present day, just kept making amendments to the constitution
[Amit Varma]: every time they didn't agree with what a court would have to say.
[Amit Varma]: And it became more of a periodical than a book.
[Amit Varma]: But the question here is that, let's say that by some miracle, you could change the constitution
[Amit Varma]: and make it what you wanted.
[Amit Varma]: It would still be a question of elite people imposing ideas on a country that broadly does
[Amit Varma]: not agree with these ideas.
[Amit Varma]: So, the larger task, if the constitution ever changes the way I would rather see it change,
[Amit Varma]: is if these ideas emerge from the culture itself and people demand freedom and people
[Amit Varma]: demand all of these things.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have sort of change coming forward.
[Guest]: I don't agree with you, Amit.
[Guest]: See, the real problem in India is we've never really experienced freedom.
[Guest]: Okay, so people, the problem is that people think they are free.
[Guest]: So now to actually prove to them that they are unfree and what is the world that they
[Guest]: are living in is actually not the right world is a very difficult exercise.
[Guest]: And unlike when you look at the time of the American constitution, the people who drafted
[Guest]: it were living away from the British guys and their freedoms were then being imposed,
[Guest]: the British started imposing taxes, etc. on them and curtailing their freedoms.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, in India, in 1947, the skin color of the rulers changed, but the real
[Guest]: lives of people, the rules governing them, look at our penal code, and how many of them
[Guest]: are still brought from the British era, we are still in place.
[Amit Varma]: And meant to subjugate us, as you say, and I keep pointing out, you know, when people
[Amit Varma]: talk about Gandhi's fight for independence, that the salt taxes of the British that he
[Amit Varma]: protested are actually far higher today.
[Amit Varma]: And we've normalized all of these, we've normalized these many oppressions, which, you know
[Guest]: The Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act is a derivative of a 1988 document.
[Guest]: So these things
[Unknown]: 1988 or 1888?
[Unknown]: 1888.
[Unknown]: Sorry, 1888.
[Guest]: 1888.
[Guest]: So, the problem really in this is, okay, how do you bring about change?
[Guest]: That's the key thing.
[Guest]: So, there are two approaches, you can try and change minds of people, or you can channelize
[Guest]: votes and push through changes through that second process.
[Amit Varma]: So, demand end and supply end, in a sense.
[Guest]: So, I said, trying to change minds of people on some of the ideas around, whether it's
[Guest]: the constitution, around the rules, is actually going to be a very, very long, drawn out effort.
[Guest]: And I tried, like I said, like you said, the constitution was the first one, we tried to
[Guest]: even persuade people in Mumbai city, that, you know, we need a directly elected empowered
[Guest]: mayor, that the city should not be under the thumb of the Municipal Commissioner appointed
[Guest]: the Chief Minister who doesn't really care about cities, because the votes are coming
[Guest]: from the rural area.
[Guest]: So, cities become a milking ground for collecting all the money and then redistributing it in
[Guest]: in rural areas where all the votes are.
[Guest]: And therefore, you see the pathetic state of not just Mumbai, but most pretty much every
[Guest]: city in this country.
[Amit Varma]: And I had a great episode on urban governance with Shruti, which sort of, which I'll again
[Amit Varma]: link it on the page of this episode, which kind of explains that dynamic beautifully.
[Guest]: Sorry, carry on.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, this was the problem that what we realized is that trying to persuade people on these
[Guest]: ideas is actually a very hard exercise.
[Guest]: And for me, the biggest learning came when we went out and talked in the Mumbai campaign
[Guest]: that we were running ahead of the Mumbai civic, the corporation elections, and people told
[Guest]: us that, look, your ideas are good, but don't tell us to vote NOTA, don't tell us how we
[Guest]: want to vote.
[Guest]: If you have good ideas, come and contest, put your own candidates, and then we will
[Guest]: support you.
[Guest]: So, don't just, so the message really was that don't tell us what to do, you give us
[Guest]: an alternative to what the other parties are basically doing.
[Amit Varma]: And this is in the context of like after the constitution thing where you
[Guest]: Yeah, so 2015, if I were to look back, 2015 and early 2016 was when I was talking about
[Guest]: the constitution ideas.
[Guest]: After the second half of 2016, early 2017 was the cities campaign, what we call free
[Amit Varma]: cities, swatantra city.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go into that, you know, the constitution thing, the thing is at around
[Amit Varma]: the same time, you know, and through this period, the RSS has also been talking of changing
[Amit Varma]: the constitution and they would, of course, make it much more culturally Hindutva as opposed
[Amit Varma]: to Hinduism.
[Amit Varma]: And it would just, the constitution would reflect the bigotry of our nation, perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: And with the exception of the RSS would have a realistic shot at this, you had absolutely
[Amit Varma]: no realistic shot because, you know
[Guest]: Yeah, it was a sort of long term project.
[Guest]: I thought that if I could put this idea out to people around the constitution, around
[Guest]: the freedom, give them an alternate document, which is really built on the American version.
[Guest]: I mean, I keep saying that India made two fundamental mistakes in 1947, we chose the
[Guest]: wrong economic model, and we chose the wrong political model, we should have copied the
[Guest]: American constitution, we should have copied the American economic model, we chose the
[Guest]: British parliamentary system, and we chose the Soviet Union's economic model.
[Guest]: And that really has sealed the fate of our country over the last 70 years.
[Guest]: So, what my thinking at that time really was that, if we can at least try and persuade
[Guest]: people on an alternative set of ideas, then some of these things may be possible.
[Guest]: I was naive.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Guest]: And like any entrepreneur, I think you make initial mistakes, and then you learn from
[Guest]: those mistakes.
[Guest]: So, I'm a political entrepreneur, I try out different things, and if they don't work,
[Guest]: then you make changes and you adapt, I failed enough times in my life, so I don't worry
[Guest]: about failure.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And moving on from the constitution, then you decided to focus on local governance.
[Guest]: So, tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, cities are the engines of growth, basically.
[Guest]: Cities are where jobs get created, cities are where wealth gets created.
[Guest]: And in India, cities are in a miserable situation, because we have no decentralization of power
[Guest]: and of funds.
[Guest]: So, the decentralization, the rules, which were there in the constitution, don't mandate
[Guest]: in the 74th amendment, they don't mandate, they leave it to the state to really decide
[Guest]: if they want to give funds to the cities automatically or not.
[Guest]: And of course, no chief minister will want to do that.
[Guest]: So, the cities basically become completely under the thumb of the chief minister, who
[Guest]: then appoints a commissioner.
[Guest]: So, the elected people, the mayor and the corporators have very limited powers to really
[Guest]: make any changes.
[Guest]: And therefore, there is no accountability, either financial accountability or governance
[Guest]: accountability.
[Guest]: So, you have, Bombay has, Mumbai has basically some 20-30 agencies, we've got 60,000 crores
[Guest]: sitting in a fixed deposit account, which could transform the city's infrastructure,
[Guest]: but no one's doing anything about these things.
[Guest]: So, it becomes basically dense of corruption, because everyone is looking at their own thing.
[Guest]: We've made, we've compounded the problem with reservation of seats or for the 50% women
[Guest]: thing where no corporator knows if in the next election, their seat is going to get
[Guest]: reserved, become a reserved constituency for a woman.
[Guest]: So, they want to make as much money as they can now.
[Guest]: So, as much money as now.
[Guest]: So, there's no incentive, absolutely.
[Guest]: So, the rules, again, you look at the rules, which are there out here, the perverse set
[Guest]: of incentives out there.
[Guest]: So, the cities really should have been the magnets.
[Guest]: I mean, we have 15 million people moving from rural areas to urban areas every year, 400
[Guest]: million people in the next 25 years.
[Guest]: What kind of lives are we going to give them in cities, slums?
[Guest]: We've all seen that in Mumbai, we are seeing that in many other cities.
[Guest]: And it doesn't have to be that way.
[Guest]: So, the cities really needed to be independent of the central government and the state government.
[Guest]: And that's why we called it swatantra cities, free cities.
[Guest]: But these are hard ideas to actually persuade people with, and we had limited budgets, we
[Guest]: were not fighting the election, our thing was, and of course, the other problem in the
[Guest]: election was that this is a decision which has to be made at the state government level.
[Guest]: And the corporators, ones whom people were voting for, had no power to decide their own
[Amit Varma]: fate.
[Amit Varma]: This is, in fact, what like Shruti had discussed in her episode on urban governance, where
[Amit Varma]: she, I mean, the fundamental problem here is there's a mismatch between power and accountability.
[Amit Varma]: The people you vote for, and who have incentives to do things for you actually has no power
[Amit Varma]: to do anything.
[Amit Varma]: And the people who have the power, they don't care for your votes, because they're getting
[Amit Varma]: it from somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: And the fundamental principle, of course, here is that, which we can all agree with
[Amit Varma]: at an intellectual level is that the more local government is, the better it is where
[Amit Varma]: power and accountability are together.
[Guest]: Yeah, the principle of subsidiarity, which says that decisions should be made as close
[Guest]: to the people as possible, and only then is where you start making better decisions.
[Amit Varma]: Because the only people who can change the system are the people who actually benefit
[Amit Varma]: from it, who have power without accountability right now.
[Guest]: So, we had drafted an alternate replacement for the Municipal Corporation Act.
[Guest]: We did all of that work, tried to take it to people.
[Guest]: But of course, it was not easy to do that.
[Guest]: And then I realized that that project is not going to go too far, because you can't really
[Guest]: persuade people, the ones in power to actually give out.
[Guest]: No chief minister wants to release the power that he has, he or she has over cities.
[Amit Varma]: You actually put together a little political machine for the Bombay elections.
[Amit Varma]: But what you did there was instead of actually putting up candidates, you set this political
[Amit Varma]: machine to get people to vote for NOTA.
[Guest]: Yeah, the hope was that if there were enough NOTA, someone would take notice.
[Guest]: But then again, the problem in India is that NOTA by itself is a meaningless vote.
[Guest]: Because even if you got everyone but one person voting for NOTA, that one vote winner still
[Amit Varma]: If NOTA wins the election, it doesn't mean there'll be another election, it's just irrelevant.
[Guest]: So, people basically, of course, rightly told us that just calling a vote for NOTA is irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, a not voting sends the same sort of signal as a NOTA does, right?
[Guest]: NOTA, actually, at least you're going out and making a conscious choice of pressing
[Guest]: a button at the EVM.
[Amit Varma]: So, you're at least going out there.
[Amit Varma]: Not voting is basically just ignoring the election process.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, this episode is about Dhanwapsi and I don't want to, you know, take any more
[Amit Varma]: of your time.
[Amit Varma]: The subject, though, the journey that you've made is fairly fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: But so before we go into a commercial break, and we'll come back for Dhanwapsi, I want
[Amit Varma]: to ask you one more question.
[Amit Varma]: And I've been asking you this since 2015.
[Amit Varma]: And it's something I didn't understand back then is that my thing was that look, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you are against Modi now, you supported him in the public eye, people think, oh, that
[Amit Varma]: this is one of the masterminds behind the whole Modi thing, he runs all of Modi's tech,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: Why don't you speak out against Modi?
[Amit Varma]: It would make a difference.
[Amit Varma]: Why don't you speak out publicly about your disillusionment, all the things that you basically
[Amit Varma]: said in this episode of the problems you have with him.
[Amit Varma]: And at that time, you weren't, I mean, now, of course, you are, and you've come on this
[Amit Varma]: show and you've spoken about it.
[Amit Varma]: But at that time, you weren't like, what was the thinking there?
[Guest]: Like, see, I've not really spoken at all, either about my role in the campaign.
[Guest]: I've not given interviews for pretty much most of my last.
[Guest]: Some of it is urban mythology, which is built up.
[Guest]: So, see, the point is that, what is it, I mean, I tend to look forward rather than back.
[Guest]: So, my decision to support the BJP and Modi, whether it's in 2009 or after that, I think
[Guest]: was the absolutely right decision at that point of time.
[Guest]: Given the information available.
[Guest]: I think given what the country needed at that point of time, given the information available.
[Guest]: And of course, what I knew, and it was a decision which I made and a lot of the country made
[Guest]: at that particular point of time.
[Guest]: I think I perhaps was a little more wedded to the decision or I thought a lot more about
[Guest]: the decision because I was quite involved in the campaign.
[Guest]: But one decision which I did make was that, okay, what's past is past, we need to look
[Guest]: forward.
[Guest]: And by being critical of Modi or by saying that he should have done this, he should have
[Guest]: done that, I don't think it solves the problem.
[Guest]: I think what we really need to look at, and that's what I've spent the last year, year
[Guest]: and a half thinking through, I think it's very easy to criticize, okay, but then what
[Guest]: is your alternative?
[Guest]: That's what everyone comes down to even today, saying that, okay, so you don't want to vote
[Guest]: for Modi.
[Guest]: What is your alternative?
[Guest]: Whom are you going to vote for?
[Guest]: And that is the question which really drove me, saying that, can we come up with a credible
[Guest]: alternative to not just Modi, but the current set of political parties, because like you
[Guest]: said earlier, it doesn't make a difference who's in power.
[Guest]: On the economic side, they're all the same.
[Guest]: On the political and other freedom side, some are on one side, some are on the other side.
[Guest]: But effectively, they are all running what I call PPP, you know, planned perpetual poverty.
[Amit Varma]: And as your good friend, Arun Shourie said, the BJP is really UPA plus cow.
[Guest]: So I think if you start thinking about it from, like an entrepreneur, okay, what's happened
[Guest]: in the past is done, now you look forward, where are the opportunities which are there
[Guest]: in the election?
[Guest]: And I think what's fascinating, at this point of time is the options that people have today
[Guest]: are not particularly thrilling, you know, like, you don't see an emotive wave, which
[Guest]: started building up late 2013, and towards early 2014.
[Guest]: And this creates a market opportunity.
[Guest]: I look at it that the political marketplace has options, which the consumers are not excited
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: But is there an opportunity to provide them with something that they want something different?
[Amit Varma]: And that's what we'll talk about after this commercial break.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, it's another awesome week on IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: This week on Cyrus Says, Cyrus talks to journalist Rachel Lopez about her taxi ceiling art series
[Unknown]: and her own podcast, Wordy Wordpecker, available only on the IBM network.
[Unknown]: On Simplify, Chuck Narain and Sreeket deconstruct the latest UN report on climate change and
[Unknown]: why the next two decades might be the most important for the earth.
[Unknown]: On the latest special episode of Pesa Vesa, Anupam talks to Hansi Mahotra, an investment
[Unknown]: professional and owner of the financial block, TheMoneyHunts.com.
[Unknown]: On Suneo One, Sheila Dittia and I speak to Arpit Ratan, co-founder of SignZ, a fintech
[Unknown]: company that makes regulatory processes for bank and other financial institutions simple,
[Unknown]: secure and compliant.
[Unknown]: On the Kinetic Living podcast, Coach Urmi talks to childhood buddy and actor Shikhat
[Unknown]: Al-Saniab.
[Unknown]: She elaborates on her fitness journey and how she balances work, diet and the need to
[Unknown]: stay fit.
[Unknown]: And just a reminder guys, please tell a friend, you need to tell a friend that you're listening
[Unknown]: to a podcast that you like and get them to listen to the podcast that you think they
[Unknown]: will like.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's take you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sitting with my friend Rajesh Jain and we're now going to talk about Dhanwapsi.
[Amit Varma]: Rajesh, what is Dhanwapsi?
[Guest]: So Dhanwapsi is a movement to make every Indian rich and free.
[Guest]: So what we want to do is to ensure the return of public wealth, surplus public wealth back
[Guest]: to the people.
[Guest]: Our estimate of the public wealth of Indians is 50 lakh rupees per family.
[Guest]: And what we want to see is 1 lakh rupees go back to every family every year.
[Guest]: It helps tackle what I call the Hamisha problems of poverty, unemployment, corruption and it's
[Amit Varma]: got a lot of other very positive benefits.
[Amit Varma]: Let's define public wealth first.
[Amit Varma]: Public wealth is basically wealth which is owned by the government and not by private
[Amit Varma]: individuals and therefore, it's wealth which is owned by all of us.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's the word I would use is controlled by the government.
[Amit Varma]: It's owned by the people.
[Guest]: And this largely falls in three categories.
[Guest]: There are the public lands, so which would be in Mumbai, let's say, Navinagar, the eastern
[Guest]: waterfront or in Delhi, Lutyens Delhi, Delhi cantonment, the public sector undertakings
[Guest]: is the second category and then all the assets that they have.
[Guest]: And the third is the mineral wealth that is there.
[Guest]: So, all put together, I mean, we've got a detailed wiki on our website thanwapasi.com,
[Guest]: which actually we've measured all of this and this comes to 1500 lakh crores.
[Amit Varma]: 1500 lakh crores?
[Guest]: Yeah, about 20 trillion dollars.
[Guest]: So, 15 followed by 14 zeros if you're counting.
[Amit Varma]: And how much of this should legitimately be owned by the state in your view and how much
[Amit Varma]: of this should just, you know, where you can you ask the question to why is it owned by
[Guest]: the state?
[Guest]: Yeah, so all of this is actually what we define as surplus wealth.
[Guest]: So, we are not counting the real, the few things that the state should be doing.
[Guest]: I mean, if you actually look, police stations, parliament, the judiciary, the army, I mean,
[Guest]: there is no logic.
[Guest]: Let's take a simple example.
[Guest]: Navinagar in Mumbai, it was fine in 1790s when it was set up.
[Guest]: It was fine till 1946 or early 1947 when it should have been there.
[Guest]: What is the logic for having it right now?
[Guest]: It's basically become a lifestyle center, the best golf course, the best wedding venue
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: But this is place where we need, we should be having economic activity.
[Guest]: You know, people should be not having to commute three hours in every day, they should be getting
[Guest]: whether it's affordable homes, whether it's educational colleges, whether it's offices,
[Guest]: all of that should be happening because that is what creates wealth.
[Guest]: So, our point is that if you want to eliminate poverty in India, you need to start getting
[Guest]: all of these surplus assets into production, into use, and that then creates wealth.
[Guest]: So, you monetize all of these assets, and then you return the wealth back to people.
[Guest]: So, that then has the other benefit.
[Guest]: So, other than being under the government, because the government basically we all know
[Guest]: there's a lot of wastage, which is there.
[Guest]: I mean, now government just raided the National Small Savings Fund to put money into Air India.
[Guest]: So, all of this started to keep happening, because this is the actual wealth of the people.
[Guest]: So, it is pathetic that, you know, we keep people poor, and then, of course, they don't
[Guest]: even know that they have access to a large sum of money, which is their own, it is their
[Guest]: own wealth.
[Guest]: All that we are seeing is start returning it back to them, so they can craft their own
[Guest]: path to prosperity.
[Amit Varma]: So, what you would suggest is for something like a Navi Nagar, then, for example, or any
[Amit Varma]: large sprawling land, which the government has and is really doing nothing with.
[Amit Varma]: What you would say is that privatize it, which will have two effects.
[Amit Varma]: One effect is that what you the money that you get is the money of the people and you
[Amit Varma]: want to distribute it to the households of this country directly without, you know, any
[Amit Varma]: other use for it.
[Amit Varma]: So, it goes back to the people it belongs to.
[Amit Varma]: And the second order effect is that once it is privatized, it will be put to optimal economic
[Amit Varma]: use and that itself will generate wealth and prosperity.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And more importantly, to add to that, actually, is that today, when it stays with the government,
[Guest]: there is corruption, also, because some of it starts getting edged away.
[Guest]: I mean, railway land, no one even has an account of how much land has been sort of encroached
[Guest]: or privately monetized.
[Amit Varma]: So, public assets, which are basically private wealth creation, colonialism, all of that
[Amit Varma]: starts coming.
[Amit Varma]: And industrialists will come and say, okay, let me use this much land and I'll set up
[Amit Varma]: a factory here or I'll do whatever and it's actually public property.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So, this happens in most wherever there is land available.
[Guest]: People have been doing that in cities.
[Guest]: This has been happening.
[Guest]: But there are no clear titles also available in many of these places.
[Amit Varma]: So, your concept of Dhanwapasi really is that everyone in this country, no matter how poor
[Amit Varma]: he is, even the beggar at the traffic signal actually has a lot of Dhan in the form of
[Amit Varma]: this public wealth, which he has no access to whatsoever.
[Amit Varma]: And no idea about.
[Amit Varma]: No idea about.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not Dhan being used for the legitimate purposes of the state, or whatever one agrees
[Amit Varma]: they might be.
[Guest]: But it's just lying around, it's wasted.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, there are two arguments really for Dhanwapasi, there is the economic argument and the moral
[Unknown]: argument.
[Guest]: The economic argument is efficiency, that these are assets which are not being used.
[Guest]: If you get them into use, you'll have greater efficiency, which will lead to wealth creation
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: But there is also the moral argument that what is happening right now is actually theft.
[Guest]: What the government is doing right now is taking the property which belongs to the people
[Guest]: and is sitting on it.
[Guest]: They've basically stolen all of this wealth.
[Guest]: This is wealth which should be returned back to people.
[Guest]: And that is morally the right thing to do.
[Guest]: So, the government cannot be sitting and claiming, or a thief cannot be coming and claiming that
[Guest]: look, I'm going to use your money more efficiently, so let me steal it from you.
[Guest]: Morally, this is wealth of the people, this should go back to them.
[Guest]: Let people decide how they want to use that money.
[Amit Varma]: What Dhanwapasi basically means is here is all this Dhan, which is held by the state,
[Amit Varma]: and you want a Dhanwapasi, you want this Dhan to go back to the people.
[Guest]: Go back to the people, because let's, and what is the broader idea behind it?
[Guest]: Indians, the average per capita income today in India is $1,700, $1,800.
[Guest]: More importantly, the family income, the median family income in the country is 10,000 rupees
[Guest]: a month.
[Guest]: A family of five earning 10,000 rupees, probably saving a small fraction of that, many of these
[Guest]: families actually would also be in debt, especially in rural.
[Amit Varma]: So, the wealth is negative, basically.
[Amit Varma]: Wealth is negative.
[Guest]: And it makes no sense, you know, because of the policies that we've had, what we talked
[Guest]: about earlier, the anti-prosperity machine that every government in India has run and
[Guest]: continues to run, has actually been the biggest wealth destruction, I think, in the history
[Guest]: of the world.
[Guest]: I mean, you have 1.3 billion people who are denied the chance to be rich.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the late leader Sharad Joshi ji used to use a term which resonates with me a lot,
[Amit Varma]: the negative subsidy, which he used in the context of farmers, we had a great episode
[Amit Varma]: on agriculture where Gunwant Patil ji elaborated on that, check that out.
[Amit Varma]: So, what is the mechanism of this thanwapsi?
[Amit Varma]: How would it work?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, there are two key questions to address.
[Guest]: I think first is, how do the resources get raised?
[Guest]: And then how do they get given back to people?
[Guest]: So, how do we deliver it?
[Guest]: So, let's talk about raising, where does this money come from?
[Amit Varma]: To begin with, you've kind of identified a lot of this land, which is just lying around.
[Guest]: So, what we've done is, and it's all there on our public wealth wiki, we've tried to
[Guest]: identify from listed sources, and I don't think that's complete, but it's what we have.
[Guest]: Pretty much every government controlled land that is there, with defense, railways, public
[Guest]: sector undertakings, etc., we've then done a valuation of that.
[Guest]: We've taken an FSI of 1 in all cases, which is actually low.
[Guest]: In Mumbai and Delhi, the FSI should be really 10.
[Amit Varma]: It's ludicrously low.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there's no reason, like Alex Tabarrok, who did an episode with me on FSI said there's
[Guest]: no reason why it can't be 30, 40, 50.
[Amit Varma]: We've taken, we've been very conservative in our calculations, and that's how we've...
[Amit Varma]: That's really low.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: We've arrived at these numbers, which are there.
[Guest]: So, for land, for public sector undertakings, I mean, some of the corporations are not even
[Guest]: held publicly, like LIC, and the India Post are still not listed, so we have no way of
[Guest]: estimating wealth.
[Guest]: You take entities like Coal India, they should actually be worth probably 10 times what they
[Guest]: are worth today, because Coal India is looted three ways.
[Guest]: First, the government loots them from all the profits that they make, they make them
[Guest]: dividend it out to the government.
[Guest]: Second is, it's the most overstaffed, one of the most overstaffed organizations, so
[Guest]: the employees are, in theory, looting it.
[Guest]: And then you have the contractors and the politicians when the coal starts flowing out.
[Guest]: So, there is no reason really for anyone to buy Coal India stock, theoretically.
[Guest]: On the other hand, you have in Saudi Arabia, you have Aramco, which is worth a trillion
[Guest]: and a half or $2 trillion, and here we have Coal India, which is worth $25 billion, having
[Guest]: one of the largest coal reserves in the world.
[Guest]: So, in the hands of government, these assets are really not worth much, put them in private
[Guest]: hands.
[Guest]: So, how do you do this?
[Guest]: We've written out a Dhanwapasi bill, which we've sent to the Prime Minister and to every
[Guest]: Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha MP, a bill which can actually be introduced in the Lok Sabha and
[Guest]: passed.
[Guest]: And it gives a four-stage process of how you generate the wealth.
[Guest]: First is identifying the resources, of course, we've done it at our level, but presumably
[Guest]: government sources will have a lot more info, so identify, restructure them, so in the way
[Guest]: that they can be most optimized for private use, get all the permissions in place, get
[Guest]: all the land titles clear, so there's no litigation afterwards, clear property, clear asset.
[Guest]: And third is auction.
[Guest]: And fourth is, as the monies come in, you're putting them into a fund from where it can
[Guest]: be returned.
[Guest]: So, this is how the wealth is getting created or generated from all of these public assets.
[Guest]: How do you deliver?
[Guest]: The second part is how do you get it across to people?
[Amit Varma]: To sort of come back to this, I think there are like what just comes to my naturally cynical
[Amit Varma]: mind because I'm very skeptical about how government operates is that you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: the auction mechanism, which is a good thing, but, you know, the first issue there is that
[Amit Varma]: if you talk about selling all this public land, it's a process that for politicians
[Amit Varma]: incentives are for subverting the whole process and giving it to favored cronies under conditions
[Amit Varma]: that would fetch less than the market value, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And you think auctions would probably be one way to have a transparent process.
[Guest]: So, what we are saying also in the bill is there's a separate Dhanwapasi commission gets
[Guest]: created.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, you take the matter out of the politicians and the bureaucrats.
[Guest]: But the government only will create the commission.
[Guest]: Yeah, government has to create the commission.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, at some point of time, you have to look at that.
[Amit Varma]: There is no other way.
[Guest]: But of course, we are also solving the, trying to solve the problem of who forms the government.
[Guest]: We can take that up a little bit later.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, the first part of it is really how the assets are identified.
[Guest]: The process of auction is a transparent process.
[Guest]: And look at what's happening today.
[Guest]: Today, these assets are sitting with the government.
[Guest]: They are either picked up by some of their friends, crony people, or they are just wasted.
[Guest]: So, you have effectively, you have a plot of land, which is sitting idle, and then you
[Guest]: have five unemployed people sitting somewhere away.
[Guest]: Now, you put these five people on work on the land, they will create wealth.
[Guest]: But today, if they are sitting idle, there's no wealth creation, which is happening.
[Guest]: Simple example here.
[Guest]: So, my belief is that this is at least a starting point.
[Guest]: If there are better solutions, I think we are definitely open to ideas from the outside
[Guest]: on what can be done better.
[Guest]: But our key point is, this is the wealth of the people which should be, the process of
[Guest]: returning it should start.
[Guest]: Then comes how do we give the money back to people?
[Amit Varma]: To get back to the process of returning it, one more question.
[Amit Varma]: Which is that, if you, for example, if you put too much of this land on the market at
[Amit Varma]: the same time, the value actually depreciates because the supply has gone up so suddenly.
[Amit Varma]: So, you plan to phase it out over time.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, if I look at it, the actual process, I think how we can do it is that in the first
[Guest]: year, the public sector undertakings, they are the low hanging fruit.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: So, by that time, you also have a year then to get the land processes set up in place.
[Guest]: And I think it will be a good idea if land prices come down, especially in places like
[Guest]: Mumbai and Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, we have some of the most expensive real estate, again, because of bad laws.
[Guest]: You've covered that earlier in your earlier episodes, because of bad rules that are there.
[Guest]: And again, if the core price of the land actually comes down, you'll again have more economic
[Guest]: activity, things which were unaffordable earlier.
[Guest]: Couldn't set up a college, couldn't have affordable homes, couldn't have hospitals
[Guest]: or whatever, all of the stuff that drives economic activity, you'll have a lot more
[Guest]: of that happening.
[Guest]: Prices in Mumbai and Delhi, especially, and some of the larger cities in India have been
[Guest]: artificially driven up, because we have put so many constraints.
[Guest]: It's like, take a simple example, we've reclaimed the sea, we've not reclaimed the sky.
[Guest]: There are 100 stations in Mumbai and Delhi, we can have a million square feet built above
[Guest]: every railway station.
[Guest]: That's what happens in Hong Kong, Singapore, New York, all over the place.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the point Alex Tabarrok made in his great episode on FSI with me, where he said
[Amit Varma]: that we need to reclaim the sky, not the sea, and other cities in the world have FSI of
[Amit Varma]: 30, 40, they build upwards, we have an FSI of 4 or 5.
[Guest]: And we have done both the things, we have built a 100 storey building in Mumbai, we've
[Guest]: also built on top of a railway station in Vashi, but we've done it for one station.
[Guest]: So again, this is just economic opportunities, which are lying, which go a begging.
[Guest]: And therefore, we as a country stay poor.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, let's move on to the second part of your thing now, how do we get this money to
[Amit Varma]: the people?
[Guest]: What's that?
[Guest]: So our first point is, this has to be universal.
[Guest]: Okay, so yeah, people will come in and say, why should Ambani and Birla and everyone get
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: And there are two answers to it.
[Guest]: First is that every person, every citizen of India has an equal right on the wealth
[Guest]: of the country.
[Guest]: So it does not matter how rich or poor you are, you have a right.
[Guest]: And the beggar at the traffic signal should get the same as Mukesh Ambani.
[Guest]: Same as, it's the equal share in the wealth.
[Guest]: Second is why universal?
[Guest]: Because it just makes sense, of course, everyone should get it.
[Guest]: And then you don't want to create another bureaucracy with corruption, trying to identify
[Guest]: should Amit get it and should Rajesh get it?
[Guest]: So what is your income?
[Guest]: What is your BPL line and all of those things?
[Guest]: Nothing.
[Guest]: So everyone gets it, you don't need bureaucracies to identify who should get it, who should
[Guest]: not get it.
[Guest]: And the process of returning it can be through bank accounts, possibly linked, of course,
[Guest]: linked with Aadhaar.
[Guest]: DBT today is anyway happening to roughly a few hundred million people, probably close
[Guest]: to 500 million people in all the various governments, direct benefit transfers already happening.
[Guest]: I say is that, you know, the Election Commission can hold an election in 30 days and reach
[Guest]: out to every Indian who does not have to walk more than 10 minutes to actually go cast a
[Guest]: vote.
[Guest]: So the people who are left out from the bank account creation, I think we can have one
[Guest]: exercise which lets people create a bank account and you don't need a physical branch, you
[Guest]: can do phone banking, equivalent, all of these possibilities are there.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a significant economic incentive for a family when they're going to get one
[Guest]: lakh rupees to actually go and get a bank account.
[Guest]: All you have to do is to generate the awareness.
[Guest]: And these are the poorest families in India would probably be saving not more than 10,
[Guest]: 20,000 rupees, like we said earlier, debt.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a great economic incentive.
[Amit Varma]: But you were joking about the Aadhaar linkage, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because coercing Aadhaar on people is, you know, then you see the other aspect of freedom
[Guest]: come in.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So there are, like I said, Aadhaar is one possibility.
[Guest]: Whatever, it's a mechanic, the mechanics can be debated yourself.
[Guest]: We need to ensure that, you know, there's no fraud, there is no corruption in the process
[Guest]: of giving it.
[Guest]: So some form of identity will be required one way or the other.
[Guest]: So make it universal, give it into people's bank accounts.
[Guest]: So 20,000 rupees per person, one lakh rupees for a family of five.
[Guest]: And it is recurring.
[Guest]: So it is every year.
[Guest]: And I think in the next five to 10 years, we would have completely transformed India.
[Amit Varma]: So every year a person is going to get 20,000 bucks.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Does that really make such a big difference?
[Guest]: Again, go back to what the income of a typical family is, what are the savings and so on.
[Guest]: My sense is, at least from what initial feedback we've got, I think it will make a very big
[Guest]: difference.
[Guest]: Because the most important number is, 10,000 rupees is the income, monthly income.
[Guest]: Savings are probably, let's say, 10% or so for a household, for a household.
[Guest]: So 1,000 rupees.
[Guest]: What we are really doing is that 10, 12,000 rupees savings are now being multiplied 10
[Guest]: times over.
[Amit Varma]: Instead of 12,000 savings for a household, you're getting one lakh to a household.
[Guest]: One lakh additional, which is there.
[Guest]: And that is really, really transformational.
[Guest]: That is, I think, what we'd like to accomplish through this, through Dhanwapasi.
[Guest]: I mean, every year that we are not helping or not returning this wealth, which is legitimately
[Guest]: that of the people, because we are saying that, you know what, we are keeping this for
[Guest]: your descendants.
[Guest]: So you will not become rich, but maybe two, three generations from now, you will become
[Guest]: rich.
[Guest]: Complete nonsense.
[Guest]: Give the money back, let people become rich.
[Guest]: Now, you don't have to then support them or help them afterwards.
[Guest]: And we are actually spending probably a very large sum of money anyways today on all of
[Guest]: these subsidies and all of these schemes, a lot of which is just looted away.
[Guest]: Or it is going to people who don't need it.
[Guest]: Some bureaucrat in Delhi deciding what scheme is right for some poor family in Jharkhand.
[Guest]: This is again about individual choice.
[Guest]: You get your one lakh rupees for your family, you decide how you want to spend it.
[Guest]: Do you need to buy a Buffalo?
[Guest]: Do you need to add an extra room in your house?
[Guest]: Do you need to sell the cycle and get a bike?
[Guest]: Do you need to invest that money for your child's education?
[Guest]: It is your prerogative.
[Guest]: So actually, by unlocking this wealth, we are freeing the people from the bureaucrats
[Guest]: and the politicians.
[Guest]: So not only we are freeing the wealth, but this is the way you actually get freedom back
[Amit Varma]: into people's lives.
[Amit Varma]: And you'd rather empower these people by giving them the money rather than saying that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: the government will do worthy things with it in your name, whether it's build statues
[Amit Varma]: or subsidy schemes or whatever.
[Guest]: No, here, take the money directly.
[Guest]: Yeah, because everything else is coercion.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, when government has put up already 60,000 crores into Air India, every poor family
[Guest]: has already paid 200 rupees, 2000 rupees, sorry.
[Amit Varma]: To Air India?
[Guest]: For Air India.
[Amit Varma]: And without being asked about it.
[Amit Varma]: So all you listeners who are Indian taxpayers, you've paid 2000 rupees to Air India, were
[Guest]: you asked about?
[Amit Varma]: Not just taxpayers, every Indian family.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone pays tax.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone pays.
[Guest]: No, obviously, I mean, by taxpayers, I mean, 100% of us pay taxes, as I keep pointing out.
[Guest]: I mean, all of these loan waiver schemes, MSP, and all of these new schemes which are
[Guest]: announced, they're all taking away money from people.
[Guest]: Of course, we are just too unorganized to protest about any of these schemes at all.
[Guest]: But what we are saying is get rid of all of these things, because every one of them, I
[Guest]: think the key message for people is that every one of them actually increases poverty.
[Guest]: It does not increase prosperity.
[Guest]: It hurts the poor the most, because they have no choice in this matter.
[Guest]: And they should be having the freedom to decide what they want to do with the money.
[Guest]: My belief is that even the poorest family knows what is right.
[Guest]: There have been studies conducted.
[Guest]: This whole, when I talk to people, many times people say, oh, but they'll blow it up in
[Guest]: drinking and wasting it.
[Guest]: It's completely the opposite.
[Guest]: They know what is good for them.
[Guest]: There'll always be that small fraction of people who will probably misuse some part
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Guest]: They do have the right to use the money.
[Guest]: But it's their choice.
[Guest]: Let them decide what they want.
[Guest]: Because every year that we are losing out on this, I mean, a simple example, a simple
[Guest]: point, 25 million kids get into the education system every year.
[Guest]: We are subjecting them to a government education system, which does not work.
[Guest]: You don't educate them right.
[Guest]: You are basically, it's a human rights issue, you know, literally.
[Amit Varma]: And more than that, they go out and because the education system is so bad, they end up
[Amit Varma]: having no skills at all.
[Guest]: And therefore, our jobs crisis becomes even worse.
[Guest]: Completely.
[Guest]: So give them, give the money back.
[Guest]: I think you need to do this.
[Guest]: I mean, even though technically you can do it for a longer period, 5 to 10 years, because
[Guest]: there is no other way by which we are going to put Indians on the path to prosperity.
[Guest]: What else is the solution?
[Guest]: In fact, if you go back in America, they did pretty much similarly in the when the pilgrims
[Guest]: and the early early settlers came in, they were given land, they tried community farming
[Guest]: earlier, people started dying because no one wanted to really work out there.
[Guest]: Everyone wanted the free lunch.
[Guest]: Then they started saying, okay, this is your individual plot of land, you decide what you
[Guest]: want to do with it.
[Guest]: And that started the process of prosperity in America.
[Guest]: I think in India, what we don't realize is that our people just don't realize because
[Guest]: we are where we are.
[Guest]: So, but the point I try and make to people is that your net worth should have been 10
[Guest]: times more today, had we done the right things over the last 70 years.
[Guest]: And that's the change that we need to bring out, bring in India.
[Amit Varma]: That I completely agree with.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one early objection I had to Dhanwapsi when I first heard about it, and
[Amit Varma]: I spoke to your colleague Kumar about it, and I said that, listen, okay, I understand
[Amit Varma]: that there's this public wealth and it's debt capital, and you're going to sell it off.
[Amit Varma]: But by selling it off, why don't you simply reduce the tax burden and maybe, you know,
[Amit Varma]: cut down on all the taxes that people have to pay, which are, you know, essentially a
[Amit Varma]: form of theft, because the state does all kinds of things with it, which are not legitimate
[Amit Varma]: functions of the thing.
[Amit Varma]: And his answer, which kind of convinced me was that what you're then doing is that the
[Amit Varma]: Ambanis and the Adanis will benefit more from this and the poor people and by actually giving
[Amit Varma]: the money directly to each person at an equal level, you're making sure that the beggar
[Amit Varma]: on the street gets the same amount as the Mukesh Ambani, well, if you just reduce taxes
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, it's the rich who would really benefit from the lowering of the burden.
[Guest]: And there's one more point to add to that, which is that Dhanwapsi is not universal basic
[Unknown]: income.
[Guest]: There's a very big difference between the two.
[Guest]: UBI is seen as an entitlement.
[Guest]: This is the right of people.
[Guest]: This is their wealth.
[Guest]: So we are not doing anything other than giving them back what is already theirs.
[Guest]: Just that they don't know about it today, just because they don't know and doesn't allow
[Guest]: the government to retain control on that wealth.
[Guest]: This is not perpetual.
[Guest]: It's not a lifetime commitment that we are making.
[Guest]: This is still, the wealth is there, what is generated from there, till we are giving it
[Guest]: back.
[Guest]: We are seeing as of today that the wealth is 50 lakh rupees in the surplus wealth.
[Guest]: So potentially one lakh can be given for 50 years, it may be more, it may be a little
[Guest]: bit less.
[Guest]: But my feeling is that after 5 to 10 years, it will not make much of a difference to most
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: Because by that time, they would have all started creating their own path to prosperity
[Guest]: and their incomes would be, or their wealth would be a multiple, where this may not make
[Guest]: as much of a difference.
[Guest]: But we have to kickstart this process, we have to free up this wealth and get it out
[Guest]: in the hands of people.
[Guest]: I think that's very important.
[Guest]: UBI has been used in developed countries more as a solution against the automation and the
[Guest]: jobs crisis that is there.
[Guest]: This idea is really new and innovative because it's about the public wealth.
[Guest]: It's about the wealth, which, I mean, frankly, most people don't even know.
[Guest]: We all, like you said in the beginning, it's owned by the government.
[Guest]: But what is owned by government?
[Guest]: Government ownership means it's actually government control.
[Guest]: But we seem to separate out, you know, it's owned by the government, so you can't be touched
[Guest]: as if the government was this massive monolith.
[Amit Varma]: And your point is, look, it's actually owned by us and damn it, we need the money.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just to elaborate on that, I mean, the point of, you know, that UBI being
[Amit Varma]: an entitlement and, you know, just looking at it from the angle of positive rights and
[Amit Varma]: negative rights, you know, an entitlement or what some people call rights, but are really
[Amit Varma]: entitlements and, you know, would fall into the positive rights category.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, what I would call fake rights is that you take money from X set of people
[Amit Varma]: and redistribute it to Y set of people, which is what UBI basically is.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: You tax everybody and then you give everybody UBI out of that.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, there is much leakage within the system.
[Amit Varma]: But what you're saying is not that there is no coercion involved here.
[Amit Varma]: This is the money of the people.
[Amit Varma]: It in fact, undoes the coercion of the past and, you know, sort of does justice by returning
[Guest]: that money in an equitable way.
[Guest]: Absolutely right.
[Guest]: In fact, I should have added this earlier that UBI in most countries, all the countries
[Guest]: that have been talked about is funded by taxation.
[Guest]: In fact, here, and we've written this out in our prosperity agenda on our site, where
[Guest]: non-wapasi is one of the key pillars, of course, for prosperity.
[Guest]: With this, we can actually reduce taxes for everyone to keep more money in people's hands.
[Guest]: They are the best decision makers on what to do with the money that is there.
[Guest]: The government should get a limited amount of money, which it spends on a limited number
[Guest]: of things.
[Guest]: Today, what's happening is that the government appetite for collecting is going up much more.
[Guest]: I mean, all these cesses and all of these additional things get squeezed in.
[Guest]: So, it's death by a thousand taxation cuts that is there.
[Guest]: And the scope of what the government does keeps growing.
[Guest]: And we are heading down the completely wrong path.
[Guest]: So, whatever the government needs, they should collect through taxes.
[Guest]: So, there's a very transparent mechanism of running the government saying that, okay,
[Guest]: this is how much we collected and this is how we have spent it.
[Guest]: But they're not taking that money and trying to spend it on 25,000 other things that they
[Guest]: should not be doing.
[Guest]: India needs a better judicial system.
[Guest]: India needs a better police force.
[Guest]: India needs a better equipped army or defense forces.
[Guest]: We today don't even have the money to buy arms if we have to protect our borders.
[Guest]: Those are the core functions of a government.
[Guest]: Protecting property rights, enforcing contracts, law and order, and so on.
[Guest]: But today, because the government does 25,000 other things, they are not even able to do
[Guest]: those core things that they should be doing, which others cannot.
[Guest]: They're not doing that.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, instead of being a strong and limited state, we are a weak and diffused large state.
[Amit Varma]: So, instead of being strong in the few functions that we should do, we are actually weak in
[Amit Varma]: those and we do 100 other things.
[Amit Varma]: And the one thing that the state is really good at is basically predation.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the state is like a parasite which just sucks and sucks from we the people.
[Amit Varma]: So, moving forward then, is Thanwapsi or is this bill you've created just a public policy
[Amit Varma]: proposal which you want others to implement, or is it a political movement you're trying
[Guest]: to start on your own?
[Guest]: So, Thanwapsi is a political movement because the people in power right now, the MPs and
[Guest]: their political parties are not going to pass the bill.
[Guest]: We have sent it to all the MPs, we've got acknowledgments back from six out of 780 people
[Amit Varma]: we have sent it to.
[Amit Varma]: Can I, by the way, reproduce a bill on the site so my listeners can also download it
[Guest]: and read it for themselves?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Great.
[Guest]: So, you'll find out in the episode.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's there on the Thanwapsi site.
[Guest]: In fact, the wiki, we have a booklet, there's a manifesto and the bill.
[Guest]: So, all these links will be in the episode page then?
[Guest]: So, the current sort of MPs are not going to do it.
[Guest]: So, how do we make it happen?
[Guest]: This is not just a theoretical idea which is left out there and then no one does it.
[Guest]: What we really want to do, and that's the process that we've started with the second
[Guest]: part of, so there's an economic idea, there's the political part of it also, which is that
[Guest]: we don't even have political freedom actually in the country.
[Guest]: We may call ourselves a democracy, but whom are we voting for?
[Guest]: We are basically voting for those people whom the political party bosses decide.
[Guest]: We have no ability to select the candidate from a political party whom we support in
[Guest]: our own constituency.
[Guest]: They put up the person, so now that candidate's loyalty or that MP's loyalty is towards the
[Guest]: political party bosses, not towards the local people.
[Guest]: So, our idea is that how can we create a technology platform?
[Guest]: So, again use technology to bring in change in the political process.
[Guest]: Technology has impacted a lot of other areas, it's not touched the political part.
[Guest]: So, how can you use technology to select and elect a government of independent candidates
[Guest]: chosen by the people through primaries in the next election?
[Guest]: And these are the people then who are elected on a Dhanwapasi plank, that they will pass
[Guest]: the Dhanwapasi bill, and once you start the process of doing Dhanwapasi, government starts
[Guest]: a lot of other side effects which take place like we discussed.
[Guest]: The process of shrinking government will begin.
[Guest]: Now, how do we make this happen?
[Guest]: So, what we've done, what our thinking is that, and that's what I was saying earlier
[Guest]: on that, there's a very interesting opportunity right now, that there needs to be an alternative.
[Guest]: So, the way I like to sort of frame it is that the political parties are built on a
[Guest]: premise of dhoka, basically betrayal.
[Guest]: You make promises and they have no intention of keeping, it's all for the purpose of
[Guest]: getting into power.
[Guest]: And all you have a choice is between one type A of dhoka or type B of dhoka.
[Guest]: That's what you're going to get.
[Guest]: We have seen it election after election through the years, but that's the choice that people
[Guest]: have had in the past.
[Guest]: What we are saying is that let's create another option, which is different from the
[Guest]: political party.
[Guest]: So, it's not about creating a new political party, it's creating a tech platform, which
[Guest]: lets individuals who like this idea, who want dhanwapasi to happen, come together with candidates,
[Guest]: with leaders who actually want to make dhanwapasi happen, who want to get elected to the Lok
[Guest]: Sabha.
[Guest]: So, it also brings down the cost of entering politics, cost of winning elections, because
[Guest]: now you no longer have to rely on your political party godfathers and give them a lot of money
[Guest]: to come into power, which sort of vitiates the entire system.
[Guest]: As members come, just like Ola and Uber, it's a two-sided platform, you have drivers and
[Guest]: you have passengers who connect through a tech platform.
[Guest]: Today, we have enough phones and smartphones across the country to actually think about
[Guest]: ideas like this.
[Guest]: So, if, say, I want to contest elections, I can do that, of course, as an independent,
[Guest]: but I'm not going to get more than a handful of votes, because who knows me, and so it's
[Guest]: a waste of your deposit, security deposit.
[Guest]: But now, if I want to contest elections, I can come on the dhanwapasi platform and say,
[Guest]: yes, I want to be a leader, and there, we have a mechanism by which you can earn points.
[Guest]: The top five people become the candidates for a primary in that constituency, where
[Guest]: people can vote for them, they can rate them, review them.
[Guest]: Someone can come in and say, hey, Rajesh, I know Rajesh, he was a BJP supporter.
[Guest]: So, I can comment on that back, but it's a transparent process.
[Guest]: You're not hiding, nothing gets hidden, because you're also tapping into the wisdom of crowds
[Guest]: really out there.
[Guest]: So, just like Zomato reviews or Amazon product reviews, they're all out there.
[Guest]: I have to then be accountable to the people.
[Guest]: So, you have primaries where the candidate then gets selected, and then, hopefully, because
[Guest]: there's a large membership base, the likelihood of that person winning is very high.
[Guest]: And I want to add one more thing out here.
[Guest]: What's very interesting, if you actually look at the numbers, there should be 100 crore
[Guest]: eligible voters in the next election in six to eight months' time, 30 crore, only 30 crore
[Guest]: are hardcore supporters of BJP, Congress, and the regional parties.
[Guest]: So, those are people who will go out, vote on the symbol that is there.
[Guest]: They're not going to sit at home, they don't care about the candidate.
[Guest]: The other 70 crore are unattached to any political party.
[Guest]: They are either not voting, they're not registered to vote, they are wasting their vote, or they're
[Guest]: deciding at the last minute whom to vote for.
[Guest]: Our goal is that if this 70 crore, people can be persuaded that there is an economic
[Guest]: incentive where you get your wealth back, and as a political part of it, where you get
[Guest]: your voice back.
[Guest]: And for the first time, you really will have a say in the future of this country.
[Guest]: You have a voice as part, of course, of a large group, you have your voice, which comes
[Guest]: back to you.
[Guest]: You are not now hostage to the political party bosses, where two people sitting in Delhi
[Guest]: are making all decisions, does not matter what you think.
[Guest]: So it's sort of a revolution on both the political side and on the economic side, because you
[Guest]: can't do one without the other.
[Guest]: I can put the economic idea out, it's not going to happen, unless, and that was the
[Guest]: big learning from the Mumbai corporation elections.
[Guest]: And the solution is not creating another political party, because then we will go down the same
[Guest]: path where there'll be two people at the top trying to decide.
[Guest]: You've seen that happen with, for example, Aam Aadmi Party, where it went down the same
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: So how do you think it bottom up, where, how do you return in a way the voice and wealth
[Guest]: of the people?
[Guest]: How do you make people politically free and give them economic freedom?
[Amit Varma]: So let me try to kind of summarize what you've said and tell me if I've made a mistake and
[Amit Varma]: sort of understanding it and I have follow up questions.
[Amit Varma]: What you're saying is that then the Dhanwapsi platform is like a tech platform, which is
[Amit Varma]: like an Uber for politics, where you're connecting, like Uber connects drivers and passengers,
[Amit Varma]: you are connecting potential voters with potential politicians.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually, from this interaction between voters and politicians, you will winnow out
[Amit Varma]: a person in each constituency, who will then represent the platform, but not a political
[Amit Varma]: party per se.
[Amit Varma]: And the only thing about this platform, which is a given is that this platform stands for
[Amit Varma]: Dhanwapsi.
[Amit Varma]: So all these voters are people who want Dhanwapsi to happen.
[Amit Varma]: And all these politicians on the other end are people who are basically saying that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, we will make it happen.
[Amit Varma]: And that is a single point purpose of this.
[Amit Varma]: And it really doesn't matter what else anyone stands for.
[Guest]: Is that correct?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's largely correct.
[Guest]: And what we are hoping also is that as people come together, there's a broader prosperity
[Guest]: agenda, where I think the Dhanwapsi by itself is the big idea.
[Guest]: And actually, if we just get that right, there'll be a lot of other things which will have to
[Guest]: be done, all of which will push India in the direction of prosperity.
[Guest]: But the core agenda is towards this.
[Guest]: So our thinking is that can we, in the next election, create a Lok Sabha of 272 plus,
[Guest]: so the majority, are independent candidates who support Dhanwapsi and therefore we can
[Guest]: get the Dhanwapsi bill passed as we go forward.
[Guest]: You're talking about the 2019 elections, which are a few months away.
[Guest]: 2019 elections, yes, in the next six months.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that's realistic, 270 independent candidates?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I think the good thing today is that what technology lets you do is if an idea catches
[Guest]: the imagination of people, it can spread very rapidly.
[Guest]: This was not possible even probably four or five years ago.
[Guest]: Each of us has the ability to, in seconds, distribute an incoming message to 100 or 200
[Guest]: other people through all the groups that we are on, and we tend to do that quite regularly.
[Guest]: So I don't have to rely on sort of the existing media channels or any of those to get an idea
[Guest]: across and it really has to be created as a people's movement.
[Guest]: So the key parameter for success or the key, the one path for us to succeed is this idea
[Guest]: has to go viral and there's an economic incentive actually for both members and for candidates
[Guest]: to spread it.
[Guest]: What we are saying is for members, when you register, you get a Dhanwapsi date exactly
[Guest]: one year from the day you sign up.
[Guest]: So the earlier you sign up, the earlier will be your date when your family will get back
[Guest]: 1 lakh rupees.
[Amit Varma]: But it should be equal for everyone, right?
[Guest]: So everyone will get it over a year, but of course, you can't distribute all of it on
[Amit Varma]: the same day.
[Guest]: But we're just creating an economic incentive for people to sign up earlier.
[Guest]: Otherwise, we have the free rider problem.
[Guest]: No one is going to sign up and we don't get any support base.
[Guest]: So in the first year, everyone will get it.
[Guest]: So it's a universal, but just it's staggered in terms of how there's an interest incentive
[Guest]: for you to sign up earlier.
[Guest]: Second, what we've done is what we are saying, of course, this is all subject to us being
[Guest]: able to pass the Dhanwapsi bill through the Lok Sabha and all that.
[Guest]: The second part of it is that if you now help sign up other people, your date advances by
[Guest]: a day for every person you sign up.
[Guest]: So we've gamified this a little bit, again, incentives work, we all know that.
[Guest]: So if you are a person who has connected with other people, the 1 lakh rupees means a lot
[Guest]: for your family, you will want to then sign up on this platform, there is no downside
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: Even a lottery ticket that you buy actually costs you money.
[Guest]: Here, there is no downside to it.
[Guest]: And we want to make people champions of this idea that by just by you signing up, you're
[Guest]: not going to make Dhanwapsi happen, go and talk about it to 10, 20 other people.
[Guest]: Because that's how the idea can spread.
[Amit Varma]: So these are the incentives of the voters and what are the incentives of the candidates
[Guest]: and for the candidate?
[Guest]: Now, what's very interesting is that if you have wanted to come into public life, if you
[Guest]: want to do public service, you want to become a politician, what are your paths today?
[Guest]: You can try going into any of the political parties, if you do not have a lot of money
[Guest]: or you do not have the right surname, it is pretty much impossible for you to make any
[Guest]: kind of progress.
[Guest]: And that's why we see some of the MPs that we see, you don't even see them after the
[Guest]: election campaign over the next few years.
[Guest]: What we are saying now is that if there are a lot of people who want to get into politics
[Guest]: for the right reasons, where making money, being corrupt and just exercising hardcore
[Guest]: power is not the primary objective or is not the objective.
[Guest]: For these people, today, there is an alternate way, which does not require a lot of funds.
[Guest]: It democratizes or opens up politics, just as Ola did.
[Guest]: If you have a car and you want to make some money driving it around, you can do that.
[Guest]: Of course, we've banned that particular element in India, but worldwide, that's the place
[Guest]: for Uber, for example.
[Guest]: You have a few hours, you've got a vehicle, you just sign up on the platform.
[Guest]: So, it opens up the access to the platform.
[Guest]: This is what we are doing out here.
[Guest]: And people can then essentially, and by primaries, it makes the process very transparent and
[Guest]: open.
[Guest]: And even in the primaries, we have set two more conditions.
[Guest]: We've said that we will only do primaries if we have a 5% plus support base in our constituency.
[Guest]: So unless there are a lack of people in a typical 20 lakh constituency, there are no
[Guest]: primaries, there is no candidate.
[Guest]: And second is the winning candidate must have 50% or more of the support base.
[Guest]: So, you cannot create selectorates.
[Amit Varma]: So, you have run-offs basically, that if you have five people in the top two players.
[Guest]: Either run-offs or you can do rank choice voting.
[Amit Varma]: There are two options, which we will be examining.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, I have some further questions on this mechanism.
[Amit Varma]: The first question is that to get sort of critical mass and build a bunch of voters,
[Amit Varma]: you have to then sell the idea to them.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the thing is the idea that you're basically selling does not seem to be the idea of economic
[Amit Varma]: freedom because those are counterintuitive, hard to understand, not already in the culture.
[Amit Varma]: The idea that you're selling is basically, hey, we'll give one lakh a year to your family.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems, although the logic is different from populism, because it's not funded by
[Amit Varma]: taxes and coercion, in terms of the appeal to the people, it seems kind of, it has that
[Amit Varma]: populist welfarist kind of feel to it.
[Guest]: I thought a lot about which is the one idea which can capture people's imagination.
[Guest]: And to everyone who gives me this, I said, give me a better idea.
[Guest]: And it's really like this.
[Guest]: I think the real problem in India today is that of poverty.
[Guest]: And I would say it's not just absolute poverty, it's just that people don't have enough wealth
[Guest]: because we suppress wealth creation, we inhibit, we proactively have policies which destroy
[Guest]: wealth.
[Guest]: Negative subsidies.
[Guest]: Like you said it earlier.
[Guest]: So, I said among all of the ideas which were there, and there are many themes which we
[Guest]: had discussed when I used to think about this, it's like an entrepreneur, okay, there is
[Guest]: a political marketplace, we are introducing competition in the political marketplace.
[Guest]: And what should my product be like?
[Guest]: And I said this theme around prosperity, this idea around that there is your wealth which
[Guest]: can be returned back to you, came across to me as a very, very powerful idea.
[Guest]: And in the last two and a half months, I released the first video on August 15th, which talked
[Guest]: about this idea.
[Guest]: It's very interesting.
[Guest]: We've had two types of reactions from people.
[Guest]: So, the intellectual elite have come back to me and said, Rajesh, how are you going
[Guest]: to make it happen?
[Guest]: You know, all these land permissions are there, this permission is there, nothing gets really
[Guest]: ever done in India.
[Guest]: It's never going to be possible to do it.
[Guest]: But then there's a completely different other set of group, which I would categorize as
[Guest]: the mass.
[Guest]: They are coming and saying, when will I get my one lakh rupees?
[Guest]: So, this theme of, you know, that this is their money, it's getting in, it's spreading.
[Guest]: Now, it's at least spreading as in it's touching people, that this is mine, I should get it
[Guest]: back and it will make a significant difference to my life.
[Guest]: It gives me an escape path from the bad or suboptimal situation that I am in.
[Guest]: And the fact that this is my right, that is, I think, very important to bring out here,
[Guest]: that this is not another government scheme, where they are giving out this kind of money
[Guest]: by redistributing it from taxes that they raise otherwise.
[Guest]: So, I think if we can get more and more of that idea across to people.
[Amit Varma]: Do you really want to invoke their anger?
[Amit Varma]: You want people to say that, damn it, I struggled so hard to get by, and my money is just lying
[Amit Varma]: out there and I want some of it.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, I mean, all that, well, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: Because unless people get really angry, okay, they do not tend to act.
[Guest]: This is, we all know this really is there.
[Guest]: So, this theme of dhoka versus dhanwapasi, dhoka or dhanwapasi.
[Guest]: So, the way I'm looking at it is, how do I frame it?
[Guest]: And I'd love inputs from people who listen to this podcast, for example, is that we have
[Guest]: to get a message out to people with limited attention spans.
[Guest]: The framing has to be such that it has to be positioned as a choice in the next elections.
[Guest]: You can either vote for BJP, Congress or your favorite regional party, that is the only
[Guest]: choice you had so far.
[Guest]: But now there is an alternative.
[Guest]: So, then when people say, what is the alternative I want people to say, there is dhoka on one
[Guest]: side, there's the betrayal, which will happen again and again to us, doesn't matter who
[Guest]: gets elected.
[Guest]: Or there is the idea of dhanwapasi and prosperity and freedom that we can make happen.
[Guest]: That is the real framing that I want to get done going forward.
[Amit Varma]: That's with regards to appealing to the voter.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my second question to you is that if the platform becomes popular, and if there
[Amit Varma]: is a chance that candidates, you know, you will reach the 5% threshold you set for yourself,
[Amit Varma]: like in a 20 lakh constituency, you will get a lakh people, and then you will elect candidates.
[Amit Varma]: Isn't there then a danger that this will be hijacked?
[Amit Varma]: Because the only thing that a candidate really needs to say is he needs to say, I believe
[Amit Varma]: in dhanwapasi.
[Amit Varma]: And beyond that, his framing can be absolutely anything.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't even know whether he really believes in dhanwapasi.
[Amit Varma]: So you can have like Modi made a lot of opportunistic noises about economic freedom before 2014.
[Amit Varma]: And people were taken in by that and voted for him and he turned out to be something
[Amit Varma]: else entirely.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as you said, this is like a crowdsourcing, no one owns this whole process, you want it
[Amit Varma]: to be bottoms up.
[Amit Varma]: How can you say that the process won't be hijacked, for example, by people who might
[Amit Varma]: say yeah, dhanwapasi is a good idea.
[Amit Varma]: But hey, let's also ban cow slaughter, and hey, let's also, you know, push Muslims to
[Amit Varma]: go out of the country to Pakistan, for example.
[Guest]: Okay, so my sense in this is that it's, you're right that it is impossible to control the
[Guest]: entire process, okay, because in the current Indian system, there is a whip.
[Guest]: So the extreme that you have right now is two people decide the entire existing set
[Guest]: of MPs are basically just administrators of MP lad funds, which they get, they have no
[Guest]: real power, no real authority to do anything, because otherwise, if they violate what the
[Guest]: party tells them to vote for, they're ejected and thrown out.
[Guest]: Look at the US system, the Republicans and Democrats, people get elected on one of these
[Guest]: two tickets, but they are free to decide on every vote on every issue on their own.
[Guest]: So there is no core, possibly maybe other than maybe finance matters, the budget or
[Guest]: whatever, there is no real whip that is holding them on this, but they are accountable to
[Guest]: their constituents.
[Guest]: What we are saying here is that if you are going to do things which is against the will
[Guest]: of the people, and you have to rely on the will of the people at the end of the day,
[Guest]: that is the choice that we have made in India.
[Guest]: If you are going to do, they are going to be up in arms against you, you are accountable
[Guest]: to them, that's first.
[Guest]: Second is, I think once people taste economic freedom, and because of that, the other freedoms,
[Guest]: I think there is no going back.
[Guest]: See, we've never had, you know, it's like we've never really had Indians exposed to
[Guest]: real freedom, you know, where you are not held hostage by some government bureaucrat
[Guest]: for like 20 permissions that you need for doing something, and so on.
[Guest]: I mean, the rules, regulations in India just keep going up in every sphere that is there.
[Guest]: And the government has become, like you said earlier, a predation machine.
[Guest]: It keeps extracting because its desire to gather votes and please people is going up.
[Guest]: Like what we have seen currently happen in the dispute between the government and RBI
[Guest]: on what to do with the big chunk of RBI reserves, you know, which really technically is the
[Guest]: wealth of the people, but they are fighting over it as if it's their pool of money to
[Guest]: distribute the way they want.
[Guest]: So, I think what needs to happen here is that you can bring in what people want through
[Guest]: the mechanism of technology.
[Guest]: And where it is happening actually is in Italy, the five-star movement, even though that's
[Guest]: a populist movement.
[Guest]: So, they came to power on a populist principle, but forget that part for now.
[Guest]: They are essentially using the app, the five-star app, using technology to source inputs from
[Guest]: people on bills, on legislation, etc.
[Guest]: So, there is a way by which you can make this happen through technology, there is discussion
[Guest]: which happens.
[Guest]: Today, there is no voice that people have at all.
[Guest]: We may make some wrong decisions, but then the candidate has to come back and face his
[Guest]: constituents and then they will decide, look, you did not do the right thing, we will vote
[Guest]: you out.
[Guest]: So, I think this is the natural process of corrective democracy, which will be there.
[Guest]: But let's at least experience that.
[Guest]: And my belief is as long as we go through the dhanvapasi, even if just dhanvapasi gets
[Guest]: done, I think in five years, you will have a very different country.
[Guest]: You will have a significant reduction in the powers and the resources that the government
[Guest]: has and it's an irreversible.
[Guest]: After that, they cannot grow it again.
[Guest]: And that will really set Indians free.
[Guest]: So, even if they want to try and do things, they will not have the ability to actually
[Amit Varma]: grow government after that.
[Amit Varma]: A platform like this seems a mind-blowing idea to me, very disruptive and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But it also seems to me that rather than being built around a set of values is built around
[Amit Varma]: one specific policy proposal, and you could easily have people come out of the system,
[Amit Varma]: who would say, fine, we'll implement dhanvapasi, but we'd also do X, Y, Z, and here just think
[Amit Varma]: of whatever is most objectionable to you.
[Guest]: I'll tell you why.
[Guest]: I thought about this.
[Guest]: And I said, should we have a pledge, you know, which says, I agree to this, I agree to this.
[Guest]: I said, it's a meaningless pledge.
[Guest]: I said, how is it that I look inside a person and say, what are your core beliefs and all
[Guest]: of these things?
[Guest]: You can't do that.
[Guest]: So, keep the big idea as big enough that it will prevent a lot of other bad things from
[Guest]: happening and you can't really, you know, like you said earlier, people could sign up
[Guest]: for anything.
[Guest]: So, it's very difficult for me to force that corrective mechanism has to be with the voters
[Guest]: in the constituency themselves who are selecting the candidate.
[Guest]: And therefore, it's not a very small electoral college, it's not 10 people deciding who the
[Guest]: candidate should be.
[Guest]: It's a very large electoral college, which is deciding who the candidate should be.
[Guest]: And if they make mistakes, well, they'll correct it in the next election.
[Amit Varma]: So now that let's, so you've got this tech platform, you've got this one policy item,
[Amit Varma]: which also, you know, has a rationale of certain principles behind it, which you hope are embraced
[Amit Varma]: by the candidates.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, let's say that everything works, you achieve critical mass in terms
[Amit Varma]: of getting voters, you get good candidates who fight among themselves, and there's a
[Amit Varma]: meritocracy and, and you actually get a lot of MPs.
[Amit Varma]: But then the question is, these are all independents, they're not part of a party, their views
[Amit Varma]: to your tech platform, but they're not actually part of the same organization.
[Guest]: So what happens next?
[Guest]: Okay, so think of this as if we are successful, it's a government of 272 plus whatever number
[Guest]: singleton parties, every party with a single candidate, because every candidate is theoretically
[Guest]: independent.
[Guest]: But we have seen this picture before.
[Guest]: This is exactly how the US Senate, how the US Congress work and in many other countries,
[Guest]: it's the same way that it works.
[Guest]: What happens, even when the president or whoever proposes something, they have to get persuaded
[Guest]: whether to support that particular bill or policy.
[Guest]: And for that, they are taking inputs from their constituents, which is what we want
[Guest]: to make happen.
[Guest]: Technology just makes this whole process easier.
[Guest]: I agree, this is not perfect.
[Guest]: And we will probably take, we'll see how to how it gets refined and how it becomes better.
[Guest]: But look at what we have today.
[Guest]: Today, we have effectively, like I said, in one of my earlier videos, we have a kakistocracy.
[Guest]: Kakistocracy is a government by the worst of the most unscrupulous people.
[Guest]: We had that for the last 70 years.
[Guest]: People who have no incentive, no interest in doing the things to get out of the way
[Guest]: of Indians who want to prosper for themselves.
[Guest]: And that's the core idea that everyone, every family has.
[Guest]: But we put hurdles, whether it's farmers, whether it's entrepreneurs, whether it's businessmen
[Guest]: going about their lives genuinely, whether it's kids wanting to get educated.
[Guest]: I mean, look at, but that is what we have today, because it's two people who have no
[Guest]: understanding of what creates prosperity and does not matter which party they are, if it's
[Guest]: one or two people deciding what should be the core policies or whatever it is there.
[Guest]: Maybe this is another extreme, but let's at least try something different for the next
[Guest]: five years, 10 years, because we know the path we are on right now.
[Guest]: If you're going to stick on that path, we know the outcomes.
[Guest]: India is not going to become rich today.
[Guest]: Every Indian family who has 18 year old kid and who has two crores in the bank, they want
[Guest]: to send their kid outside of India for education.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, under Modi, you had the largest number of multimillionaires leaving the country and
[Guest]: settling somewhere else.
[Guest]: So we are effectively sending our best brains, our brightest young kids out of the country
[Guest]: on a one way ticket.
[Guest]: How is India going to become prosperous?
[Guest]: I think for one generation, what India needs to do is to set aside everything that divides
[Guest]: us.
[Guest]: And there will always be issues that divide us from caste, community, whatever it is,
[Guest]: and focus on a single mission around prosperity.
[Guest]: It's effectively what the US did after the Civil War.
[Guest]: After 1865, it was business people who built America, Morgan, Rockefeller, Carnegie, Vanderbilt,
[Guest]: Ford and others.
[Guest]: And I think we will have that surge of entrepreneurship and innovation.
[Guest]: I mean, we have unleashed the power of 1.3 billion free people.
[Amit Varma]: The world has never seen this.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my question for you, supposing Dhanwapsi doesn't work, and your party of independence
[Amit Varma]: doesn't form the next government, what's next?
[Guest]: So there are two paths.
[Guest]: My belief is that the idea is right.
[Guest]: And we will, of course, see what feedback comes and what happens.
[Guest]: But I think the same idea can actually be applied at the state level also.
[Guest]: So we may not have Lok Sabha elections for another five years, but there are a lot of
[Guest]: state elections.
[Guest]: So I want to take the same theme around prosperity and take it to the states.
[Guest]: So states, I would add one additional idea, along with Dhanwapsi, I want to add the idea
[Guest]: of Swatantra cities.
[Amit Varma]: But states can't really do Dhanwapsi, right?
[Guest]: Because...
[Amit Varma]: Oh, there is plenty of...
[Guest]: Oh, that the state can sell?
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: There's plenty of state owned, state controlled land also that is there.
[Amit Varma]: Which if they sell, they will also be at liberty to disperse the money in this way.
[Guest]: They can do that.
[Guest]: That's at least a starting point.
[Guest]: So try that.
[Guest]: So extend the platform for MLAs and potentially for cities.
[Guest]: Cities also can do somewhat similar.
[Guest]: There are resources which are there.
[Guest]: So that's one track.
[Guest]: And second is, I will then want to also increase the education process.
[Guest]: Then we have five years or N years, whatever, three to five years, depending on what type
[Guest]: of government gets formed.
[Guest]: To persuade people that there is an alternate path to prosperity.
[Guest]: I recognize that the time is limited right now, but I also know from my previous experience
[Guest]: that the period just before an election, the six to eight months before an election is
[Guest]: probably 10 times heightened awareness than is the peace time, the four and a half years
[Guest]: in between.
[Guest]: So I think it's a great time to actually put an alternative out to people.
[Guest]: And I think we will get learnings.
[Guest]: So my sense is we'll have one of two outcomes, either we fail spectacularly, okay, in which
[Guest]: case we don't get any interaction, or if this becomes a force, then I think it is unstoppable.
[Guest]: Because like the network effects, which will be inbuilt into what we have, are going to
[Guest]: be something which no political party will be able to stop.
[Guest]: It's a genuine people's movement.
[Amit Varma]: It seems to me to be, and tell me if you agree with it, it seems to me to be a low probability
[Amit Varma]: high variance kind of thing, where this will probably 99.9% of the time, it will fizzle
[Amit Varma]: out completely and be a spectacular failure, but 0.1% of the time, it will succeed spectacularly
[Amit Varma]: and change the nation forever.
[Amit Varma]: That's what you're banking on.
[Guest]: That's how every entrepreneurial venture is about.
[Guest]: So now at the same time, every entrepreneur goes into that venture knowing, I mean, with
[Guest]: the reality that 99.99% ventures fail, but the entrepreneur has the optimism that there's
[Guest]: a 70 to 80% chance of success.
[Amit Varma]: That's how I am.
[Amit Varma]: So what you're saying is, then you have to be delusional to be an entrepreneur, because
[Guest]: if it's a 0.1%, but you think it's 70%, that's how every entrepreneur is, especially when
[Guest]: you come up with big ideas.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to sort of end on this note that, you know, in the time that I have met you,
[Amit Varma]: you had the idea of changing the constitution, then you had the NOTA idea, now you have these,
[Amit Varma]: and these seem incredibly outlandish.
[Amit Varma]: And yet people don't love you out of the room, because you have a track record of success
[Amit Varma]: in tech, where you've built multiple ventures and made them extremely successful, you know,
[Amit Varma]: starting with your India World Ventures, in which you sold for 100 million and 99 hundred
[Amit Varma]: million dollars.
[Amit Varma]: And you've built that core into a very successful company, and you have that track record of
[Amit Varma]: success.
[Amit Varma]: And no matter how outlandish your ideas, people kind of listen to you and sort of give you
[Amit Varma]: that space.
[Amit Varma]: And you've brought many of your principles of tech entrepreneurship into political entrepreneurship.
[Amit Varma]: One of those seems to be that don't agitate too much and get an idea perfect, just go
[Amit Varma]: out with it and see what happens and throw everything at the wall and see what sticks.
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of like, are there similarities between tech entrepreneurship and political
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurship?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how do you think about it?
[Guest]: Yeah, see, at least the way I've been thinking about this is first is, have a big idea.
[Guest]: The odds of success or failure don't change, because you've got to get a million decisions
[Guest]: right in anything that you do to succeed.
[Guest]: So might as well go for the moon, in terms of the idea that you have.
[Guest]: So when I started India World, the idea at that time was not just to create a news and
[Guest]: information portal, but how do you build an electronic marketplace which connected Indians
[Guest]: worldwide?
[Guest]: When I talked about in the political space with the BJP, I did not say that, okay, let's
[Guest]: move the needle from 182 seats to 210 seats or 220 seats, I said, how does the BJP get
[Guest]: a majority on its own, because the strategy then becomes very different.
[Guest]: So here it's not about saying that, look, let's try and get five independent candidates
[Guest]: into the Lok Sabha, which will actually make no difference at all.
[Guest]: So first is make big plans, because they are the only ones which can really inspire other
[Guest]: people to action.
[Guest]: That's one.
[Guest]: Second is, how do you use technology as a game changer?
[Guest]: Technology is the only thing I really know in my life.
[Guest]: And in every place I've tried to use, look ahead and see what are the things that technology
[Guest]: can do, which we can apply.
[Guest]: And when I looked at the political space, I said, okay, this is the Dhanvapasi idea
[Guest]: was there, but then I had to make it into something which is actionable.
[Guest]: And that is where this idea of platform technology comes in.
[Guest]: Over the last many years, we've seen platforms emerge.
[Guest]: So like Facebook, Google, they're all platforms, they're connecting two sides together.
[Guest]: And I said, the same thing can be applied here.
[Guest]: So instead of trying to create another political party with me at the top, trying to recruit
[Guest]: people, I said, how do I know who in a constituency in Kerala would be the right candidate?
[Guest]: So you flip the whole thing around, which is what Uber, Ola, all of these marketplace
[Guest]: type platforms are actually doing.
[Guest]: So the technology in this case is this, but in every place, how do you use technology
[Guest]: to really make a difference, be the disruptor really?
[Guest]: And the third thing is, don't worry about failure.
[Guest]: I failed enough times in my life, every failure teaches, because if you think about, okay,
[Guest]: how impossible the mountain is, or how impossible the mission is, you are not going to climb.
[Guest]: There's a very nice title of a book, Mountains Beyond Mountains.
[Guest]: And when I read it, it by Tracy Kidder, basically, it's a Haitian proverb, but it's only when
[Guest]: you climb one mountain, that you see that there is another mountain beyond it.
[Guest]: But if you knew if you sat at the bottom and saw how high the mountain is, you probably
[Guest]: not start climbing it at all.
[Guest]: So my approach in this is to get started.
[Guest]: Like you said, you try out different things, and you learn every day, can you become better
[Guest]: every day?
[Guest]: What an entrepreneur really does is not aim for massive success.
[Guest]: You're going into work every day, trying to reduce your chances of failure.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Rajesh, thanks so much for this, it's always inspiring and intellectually stimulating for
[Amit Varma]: me to chat with you.
[Amit Varma]: All the best with Dhanwapsi and I hope to have you on the show some other time talking
[Amit Varma]: about something else as well.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for the comment.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do go over to dhanwapsi at dhanwapsi.com that's
[Amit Varma]: spelled D-H-A-N-V-A-P-A-S-I.com Dhan V-A-P-A-S-I.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can also read more of Rajesh Jain's writings on at RajeshJain.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Have you gotten yourself a gym membership and shown up only a few times?
[Unknown]: Are long working hours cutting your fitness goals short?
[Unknown]: How about you change things a little?
[Unknown]: Even a small effort can make a big difference.
[Unknown]: And I'll tell you how and what exactly.
[Unknown]: Hi guys.
[Unknown]: I'm Coach Urmi and on the Kinetic Living podcast, you can look forward to some interesting stories
[Unknown]: of people who have changed the way they look at fitness after their kinetic journeys.
[Unknown]: Episodes out every Wednesday on the IBM app, website, and anywhere you get your podcasts
[Unknown]: from.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights?
[Unknown]: Do you look up to laws when you're caught up in situations?
[Unknown]: Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere bad?
[Unknown]: Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your
[Unknown]: rights are.
[Unknown]: Tune in to Know Your Kanun with me, Amar Rana.
[Unknown]: This is a podcast meant to answer all your law related queries.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanun every week on the IBM website or the app or anywhere you get your
[Unknown]: podcasts from.